Disclaimer, preface, and warning
--------------------------------

Dercuano is a self-contained downloadable HTML tarball containing a
book’s worth of disorganized notes I’ve made over the last few years.  Mostly, I made
these notes for myself, though with the intention of someday getting
most of them into shape for publication, but lacking the discipline of
regular publication, that’s probably not going to happen.  It may not
happen anyway.

Much of what is written here is wrong in a variety of ways.  Some of
it is factually wrong; some of it is okay at a factual level but has
led me to incorrect conclusions due to my misunderstanding of the
relationships between the facts; some of it is just a farrago of
incoherent sentence fragments; some of it documents the embarrassingly
long path of reasoning by which I eventually argued myself around to a
reasonable conclusion which was, in retrospect, obvious from the
start.  Most of these notes are about things I barely understood, or
didn’t really understand at all, when I wrote the notes.  In some
cases, I later came to understand them better, but in other cases I’ve
lost even what understanding I had.  Nearly every note is incomplete;
of those that are complete, very few have been checked for correctness
or revised for readability.  So, beware.

However, buried among the errors, red herrings, and ratholes, there
are some wonderful insights (perhaps even a few of them original),
many fascinating facts about the world (many of which are true, and a
few of which are original observations), and a wide variety of
inventive ideas about what is possible and what could be done, in
particular about how to improve the world with new hardware and
software — a few of them workable.

On 2019-04-28 as I write this, the Dercuano tarball is 621 kilobytes
and contains about a quarter of a million words, about 850 pages’
worth of paperback text.  This is about an eighth of the total amount
of text I have here and intend to include.

As far as I’m concerned, everyone is free to redistribute Dercuano, in
whole or in part, modified or unmodified, with or without credit; I
waive all rights associated with it to the maximum extent possible
under applicable law.  Where applicable, I abandon its copyright to
the public domain.  I wrote and published Dercuano in Argentina.
