I was talking with the entity known as The Doctor.  They mentioned
that they really liked the idea of having a tiny programming language
in your boot ROM, but had found the Forth in OpenBoot to be fiddly,
requiring a lot of effort to do simple things like changing the MAC of
a Sun NIC.

Usually what I've done with the boot ROM is to boot, though, maybe
occasionally from alternative boot media.  I found that to be kind of
fiddly in OpenBoot too.  (I also wrote a graphics demo in OpenBoot on
an OLPC, but [because I couldn't figure out how to abort back to the
interpreter, my first infinite loop ended the experiment][1]†.)

[1]: http://wiki.laptop.org/go/Forth_Lesson_4

Tcl
---

This reminded me of Yossi Kreinin's wonderful 2008 essay [I can't
believe I'm praising Tcl][0], about why Tcl is a terrible programming
language but a good command language:

[0]: https://yosefk.com/blog/i-cant-believe-im-praising-tcl.html

> Well, in Tcl that's as simple as it gets. Tcl likes to generate and
  evaluate command strings. More generally, Tcl likes strings. In
  fact, it likes them more than anything else. In normal programming
  languages, things are variables and expressions by default. In Tcl,
  they are strings. `abc` isn't a variable reference – it's a
  string. `$abc` is the variable reference. `a+b/c` isn't an
  expression – it's a string. `[expr $a+$b/$c]` is the
  expression. Could you believe that? `[expr $a+$b/$c]`. Isn't that
  ridiculous? ...

> And the nice thing about my retarded debugger front-end is that it
  looks like shell commands: `blah blah blah`. As opposed to
  `blah("blah","blah")`. And this, folks, is what I think Tcl, being a
  tool command language, gets right. ...

> And eventually, simple commands become all that matters for the
  [interactive] user, because the sophisticated user grows personal
  shortcuts, which abstract away variables and expressions, so you end
  up with `pmem 0 bkpt nextpc` or something.  *Apparently, flat
  function calls with literal arguments is what interactive program
  usage is all about.* ...

> I have a bug, I'm frigging anxious, I gotta GO GO GO as fast as I
  can to find out what it is already, and you think now is the time to
  type parens, commas and quotation marks?! Fuck you! By which I mean
  to say, short code is important, short commands are a must.

Tcl is also, it bears mentioning, quite a bit saner than bash as a
programming language.

In Tcl, `foo -x $bar -y $baz` invokes `foo` with four arguments: the
string `-x`, the value of `bar`, the string `-y`, and the value of
`baz`.  The equivalent command in bash sometimes does this and
sometimes calls `foo` with some other random number of arguments,
depending on what is in `bar` and `baz`.

In Tcl, if your code has an error, your program will stop there with a
backtrace (possibly popped up in a Tk window, if you're into that kind
of thing), while in bash, it will probably continue as if nothing
untoward had happened, unless you're running with `set -e`, which will
crash perfectly working programs with some older versions of sh,
because sh commands indicate failure in the same way that sh boolean
expressions indicate falsehood: by returning nonzero.  And not only
won't `set -e` give you no backtrace, it will give you no error
message at all --- you may not notice that anything has gone wrong.

And Tcl supports not only lists, which bash sort of does, but also
nested lists and associative arrays ("dicts" or "hashes"), although
like Perl 4 and Awk, the associative arrays are not first-class.

(Tcl's nested lists are kind of shoddy, but they do exist.  An unusual
thing about them that they sort of share with bash lists is that a
list of one string is the same as that string; a string is a
single-item list of itself, in the same way that Python uses
single-character strings to represent characters, or Octave uses 1x1
matrices to represent scalar numbers.  So you can't distinguish
between the string `squizz` and a list of one item that contains a
list of one item containing the string `squizz`.)

Also, in Tcl, you can define subroutines that return values, including
nested lists.  In bash instead your subroutines can just write bytes
to their output channel, which by default displays the result on the
terminal.

Like Bash, Tcl unfortunately doesn't support named arguments or any
other kind of name-value-pair interface that would make it reasonable
to preserve backward compatibility, except by using some ad-hoc
command-line parsing like Tk does:

    button .x -text foo -command {puts bar}

One way bash usability beats the *shit* out of Tcl usability, though,
is in tab completion, which in modern bash setups is fairly
context-sensitive, understanding the syntax of most commands well
enough to complete the appropriate kind of thing for the context
you're in, most of the time; so, for example, `sudo` will tab-complete
to available commands, `sudo apt` tab-completes to the 11 `apt`
commands, and `sudo apt install` tab-completes to the available `apt`
packages (!).

This is a huge timesaver; modern IDEs implement something similar,
with dropdowns, by using static typing information which isn't present
in Tcl, or for that matter bash.  IPython does it without static
typing information but only for properties of a variable that's
already defined.  Fecebutt and Slack provide dropdowns with substring
search when you start to @mention somebody in a text box.

Tab completion is extremely useful for navigating hierarchies; for
example, when you're booting, there's often a hierarchy of possible
boot media --- USB vs. hard disk vs. network, different USB mass
storage devices, different partitions on the mass storage device,
different files in the filesystem, etc.  Or, when you're debugging,
you may have nested structs, or arrays of structs, or linked structs,
that you maybe want to examine pieces of; or you might have nested
dicts ("objects" in JS) with arbitrary sets of names.  In Tk you have
a hierarchy of widgets.  (Though I think IMGUI is probably a better
design than Tk on modern fast machines; see file `imgui-tk` for
thoughts on that.)

Noun-verb ordering rather than Tcl's verb-noun?
-----------------------------------------------

Verbs act on nouns.  Yossi's `pmem 0 bkpt nextpc` is a verb `pmem`,
print memory, that acts on CPU 0 and, I think, prints out its
breakpoints and next program counter value.  `mv
Un_Yanqui_Enseñando_Dichos_Argentinos_a_otro_Yanqui-hBhrHaoYONs.mp4
humor/.` is a verb `mv`, move, that acts on a video named by the first
argument, moving it into a named directory.

Verbs and nouns have some type-compatibility requirements, so if you
know one of them, you can narrow down the candidates for the other,
making it easier to choose.  `mv` above only acts on filenames, and if
it's given more than two arguments its destination argument needs to
be a directory, while `mpv` only acts on *some* filenames, those that
name directories or video or audio.  `pmem` presumably only acts on
CPUs for its first argument.

If you have more verbs than nouns, tab completion is probably easier
if you specify the noun, or *a* noun, first.  If you have more nouns
than verbs, tab completion is probably easier if you specify the verb
first.  So, for example, my /usr/bin directory has 4652 verbs in it,
most of which are only applicable to a few kinds of nouns, but none of
my own directories have that many nouns in them.  `tiff2bw` is only
applicable to TIFFs, `pdftotext` is only applicable to PDFs, and
`avrdude` is only applicable to AVR flash memory images.  So probably
a noun-verb order would be more usable.

In either case, there's the possibility of needing a space-filler of
whichever syntactic category comes first.  If I don't want to do any
particular operation on some file, just see it, I still need to invoke
Unix `cat` or `less` or `xdg-open` or `ls`.  Similarly, in Smalltalk,
verbs that don't really operate on any object have to get arbitrarily
attached to some class as class methods.

If you have a lot of nouns --- or for that matter verbs --- you
probably want a better way of choosing one than reading through a list
of all of them or typing a memorized name.  As alluded to above, a
hierarchy is one possibility, while search (for example, using
substrings, as in Fecebutt, or arbitrary database queries) is another.
Bash tab-completion does a prefix search which doubles as hierarchy
navigation.  But bash tab-completion is copied from csh and tcsh,
which come from a time when avoiding process context switches was an
important consideration (so, for example, csh completions were
triggered with ^D!) and terminals were commonly 2400 baud --- 3 lines
of text per second.  Most modern computer systems have much larger
display bandwidth, often in the gigabits per second, and can thus
afford to be more proactive about presenting candidates.

Most OO and OO-influenced programming languages put object properties
(forming, sometimes, a hierarchy) and operations (verbs) in the same
namespace; Smalltalk uses the same syntax for `anArray size`, which
returns a number, and `anArray inspect`, which opens an inspector
window; or for `anArray at: 3` and `anArray at: 3 put: 4`; and, in
Python or JS, `foo.bar` can be either the instance variable `bar` or a
method `bar` of the object `foo`, although they do distinguish between
merely *reading* the property and *invoking* an arbitrary operation.

Making such a distinction, like the HTTP distinction between GET and
POST, is crucially important for tab completion: if evaluating
`foo.bar` can cause serious side effects, you don't want the UI to do
it peremptorily.  But, of the things that *can* be evaluated without
serious side effects, you would like to maximize the number that the
UI can look at peremptorily.

Another usability-maximizing design feature (missing from Tcl! but not
from bash!) is being able to write to things in a way consistent with
reading them.  That is, if reading `foo.bar.baz` gives you 3, it is
often useful to define `foo.bar.baz <- 3` or something similar as a
way to establish the same state of affairs in the future.  It's much
worse for usability to have to wander around looking for an operation
on `foo.bar` or perhaps even `foo` that has the effect of changing
`baz`.

An excellent example of the utility of writability and hierarchies was
The Doctor's original example; under Linux:

    $ cat /sys/devices/pci0000:00/0000:00:1c.0/0000:01:00.0/ieee80211/phy0/macaddress
    00:24:2c:97:d8:58

Sadly, this kernel does not provide the ability to change the MAC
address by writing to that pseudo-file.

Most of Yossi's hardware-debugging example from before could quite
reasonably be implemented as a mere object graph like this, with
custom getters performing the operations he'd decided were safely
side-effect-free.  (He mentions in the article that reading
memory-mapped I/O regions wasn't always safe, which is a pretty common
situation in device drivers.)  Occasionally you'd maybe need to apply
a verb to it.  Here's a fragment of a recent GDB session as I was
tracking down a bug, a fragment which consisted almost entirely of
such navigation:

    (gdb) p symbol
    $1 = (HCFChoice *) 0x1e
    (gdb) frame 1
    #1  0xb79ecacd in collect_nts (grammar=0x83e92e0, symbol=0x83e9258)
        at build/debug/src/cfgrammar.c:121
    121	        collect_nts(grammar, *x);
    (gdb) p symbol
    $2 = (HCFChoice *) 0x83e9258
    (gdb) p *symbol
    $3 = {type = HCF_CHOICE, {charset = 0x83e92b0, seq = 0x83e92b0, 
        chr = 176 '\260'}, reshape = 0xb79f0202 <h_act_first>, action = 0x0, 
      pred = 0x0, user_data = 0x4c3b433d}
    (gdb) p *symbol->seq
    $4 = (HCFSequence *) 0x83e92c0
    (gdb) p **symbol->seq
    $5 = {items = 0x83e92d0}
    (gdb) p (*symbol->seq)->items
    $6 = (HCFChoice **) 0x83e92d0
    (gdb) p (*symbol->seq)->items@10
    $7 = {0x83e92d0, 0xb7f89450 <main_arena+48>, 0x3c, 0x11, 0x1e, 0x0, 0x41, 
      0x29, 0x0, 0x83e431c}

You could imagine this whole transcript collapsing down to
`stack.1.symbol.dest.seq.dest.dest.items dump 10`, or even
`stack.1.symbol.seq.0.items d 10`.

Similarly, most of the booting I do could be accomplished by
navigating through a device tree and finally applying a "boot" verb.

A thing that is mentioned in this transcript, but missing from my
commands and from bash, Forth, and Tcl, is GDB's ability to refer back
to previous results; for example, instead of `p **symbol->seq`, I
could have written `p *$4`.

This kind of navigation does not entirely replace the need to pass
string --- or other! --- parameters to verbs.

GUIs
----

Noun-then-verb interaction is of course entirely standard in GUIs;
even SKETCHPAD had you select onscreen objects with the light pen
before applying actions to them by flipping switches.  It's still
uncommon in command-line interfaces.

10tcl
-----

Originally I was thinking of something fairly traditional: a simple
Lisp dialect, but with more Tclish syntax, in which symbols and lists
are quoted by default and require some kind of explicit sigil to
unquote them --- perhaps "," rather than Tcl's "$" --- and in which
the outermost parentheses are unnecessary.  And called "10tcl" as in
"tentacle".  And maybe with dicts, like Clojure.  But then I started
thinking about how to handle tab completion, and the noun-then-verb
thing popped up, and the RESTish distinction between properties and
verb invocations.

This suggests a connection with [Darius Bacon's language Cant][2], a
dialect of Scheme in which the basic procedure-definition system
includes a pattern-matching system, so that it is easy to define a
procedure which returns `#no` if invoked with the argument
`.interactive?` and a different form if invoked with two arguments the
first of which is `.pick-move`:

    (make greedy-player
      (to ~.interactive? #no)
      (to (~ .pick-move board)
        (for min-by ((move board.gen-legal-moves))
          (greedy-evaluate (update move board)))))

[2]: https://github.com/darius/cant

Specifically, you could imagine that invoking `sys.class.block.sda1
boot` would invoke the procedure denoted by `sys.class.block.sda1`
with the symbol `boot` as its single argument.  This is the same as
Tcl as far as it goes, except that `sys.class.block.sda1` is actually
an expression interpreted as it would be in Python or JS: as a series
of property accesses.  But a facility for defining actors like the
Cant `greedy-player` above would make it convenient and idiomatic to
define entities that responded to such invocations.

However, a significant difference is that these 10tcl objects
*additionally* have properties which can be, by convention, safely
enumerated and read; they might be a statically determined set or a
set computed by arbitrary code invoked at runtime, like Python
`__dir__`, `__getattr__`, and `__getattribute__`.  That is, like JS or
Python functions, 10tcl objects can have *both* behavior *and*
attributes.

As in Tcl, the first word of the command is evaluated under different
rules than the rest of it: namely, the first word is *evaluated*
(rather than used to look up a proc, as in Tcl), while if there is
more to the command, it is *quasiquoted*.

The grammar might look something like this:

    command ::= expr (hwsp quasiquoted)* newline
    hwsp ::= (' ' | '\t')*
    expr ::= '(' command ')' | name | expr '.' name | number | obj
    quasiquoted ::= '(' command  ')' | name | number | ',' expr | obj

Here "obj" is intended to represent things like lists and
dictionaries, whose syntax I haven't thought about yet.

I think the Common Lisp, Forth, and Scheme approach of defining new
control structures through compile-time metaprogramming is probably
better than the Tcl and MACLISP approach of defining them through
fexprs, partly because you can inspect the results of the compile-time
metaprograming more easily.

Footnote
--------

† It turns out that to interrupt an infinite loop in OLPC Open
Firmware/OpenBoot, the answer is that the DEL key or the key with a
rectangle on it in the upper right will abort, although after that you
have to type `enable-interrupts` to run it again, except on later
models of the XO.