Robust hill climbing in vector spaces using adaptive step sizes
===============================================================

When writing file `rubber-wheel-pinch-drive` I got confused with some
basic trigonometry, trying to solve a triangle with the law of
cosines† to find the intersection of two circles.  So, impatient, I
figured I’d solve the problem with brute force instead, so I wrote the
following implementation of hill-climbing with random restarts for
scalar functions of general vector spaces:

    def search(f, p, restarts=30, steps=30):
        best = None
        for start in range(restarts):
            current = p()
            current_badness = f(current)

            for size in range(20):
                for i in range(steps):
                    new = current + p() * 4**(4-size)
                    new_badness = f(new)
                    if new_badness < current_badness:
                        current, current_badness = new, new_badness

            if best is None or best[1] > current_badness:
                best = current, current_badness

Here `p` is a function that yields a vector from the domain of `f`,
which returns a real.

At first this didn’t work very well because I had erroneously provided
a guess function `p` that was always non-negative, so each restart
would progressively step from the neighborhood of 0 to the
neighborhood of the correct solution and then get stuck.
Nevertheless, it was able to find a reasonably good solution (and then
I realized how to solve the problem in closed form without
trigonometry).

† The law of cosines is *c*² = *a*² + *b*² - 2*ab* cos γ, where γ is
the angle opposite the side with length *c*.

Making hill-climbing in vector spaces more robust
-------------------------------------------------

Random restarts in general make metaheuristic search algorithms more
robust; indeed, even the simplest possible metaheuristic search
algorithm, “choose a random point”, becomes workable with random
restarts.

In this implementation, the restarts aren’t very random.

I tried to make the implementation somewhat robust against `p`
functions of the wrong magnitude, as you can see; the algorithm tries
a range of different exponentially-spaced sizes.  Now that I’m using a
non-broken `p`, this results in finding a solution correct to ten
decimal places, which is pretty good for hill climbing.  But the
particular orders of magnitude I chose are kind of arbitrary;
basically I was just hoping they’d cover the right range.

It occurred to me that you can make it more robust against `p` guesses
of the wrong order of magnitude by updating `size` incrementally,
using a procedure like the following: when you find a step that
improves the guess, try half that same step or twice that same step.
If that improves the guess further, then multiply `size` by 2 or ½,
respectively, before the next iteration.  This way, if your step size
is about right, `size` will experience a random walk around it, but if
it’s much too small (you’re stepping around a locally flat linear
region of the cost function) then `size` will grow exponentially,
while if it’s much too large (you’re rocketing out of the basin with
all the solutions in it) it will diminish exponentially.

By the same token, you could make it robust against a `p` function
like the one I provided by trying a step of -*p* when *p* makes the
situation worse.  That way, if you’re in a relatively non-curved region, you
can make progress by just shifting into reverse.  Trying this actually
gives you another crucial piece of information: if going both ways
makes it worse, there’s a good chance you’re in a local optimum, using a
step size that is too big to have a good chance of improving your position.

You could implement this as follows, though this code is a bit
repetitive:

    def climb(f, step):
        size, growth, here = 1, 2, step()
        cost = f(here)

        while True:
            yield here, cost  # This may be the same as last time

            where = size * step()
            new = here + where
            new_cost = f(new)
            if new_cost > cost:
                where = -1 * where
                new = here + where
                new_cost = f(new)

            if new_cost > cost:
                size /= 2
                continue

            where *= growth
            grown_new = here + where
            grown_new_cost = f(grown_new)
            if grown_new_cost < new_cost:
                new, new_cost = grown_new, grown_new_cost
                size *= growth
            else:
                growth = 1/growth

            here, cost = new, new_cost

This is able to find a good approximation of the intersection of two
circles in “only” 128 iterations, using the following definitions,
even when the answer is several orders of magnitude away from the
starting step size:

    def distance(p1, p2):
        return ((p1 - p2)**2).sum()**0.5

    def circles(c1, r1, c2, r2):
        def badness(guess):
            return ((distance(guess, c1) - r1)**2 +
                    (distance(guess, c2) - r2)**2)
        return badness

    step = lambda: numpy.random.rand(2) - 0.5

### Handling valleys, saddles, and higher-dimensional spaces ###

However, its adaptive step size will screw it in higher-dimensionality
spaces, since when it’s in a valley or saddle point where most
directions are bad, it will tend to diminish the step size and find a
point on the valley floor very precisely.  Perhaps a better approach
would be to diminish step sizes by a smaller amount that depends on
the dimensionality, so that if there’s at least one good direction,
the step size will remain constant on average.

To escape this trap, you could have different behavior when expanding
the step size than when reducing it: keep increasing the step size
without increasing the step direction until the situation stops
getting better.  That is, walk along the line of the step by 2, 4, 8,
16, 32, etc., times the size of the initial step, rather than just 2
times.  This will tend to ricochet you between the walls of a canyon,
and eliminates the bias in the step-size random walk toward smallness,
since any single lucky step in the right direction can increase the
step size arbitrarily.

This is similar to the three-dimensional optimization strategy Dave
Long tells me some bacteria use: flagella forward while things are
improving, flagella backward (resulting in random tumbling) while
things are getting worse.

In cases like those Adam and AdaGrad and the like are designed for,
where the best step size varies enormously among different dimensions,
you might want to hill-climb along one dimension at a time, so that
you can use a separate step size for each dimension.  This also
potentially permits the use of Acar’s “self-adjusting computation” and
similar generic incrementalization algorithms to speed up function
evaluation.  (See the section in file `powerful-primitives` on
incremental or self-adjusting computation.)  Unfortunately, this means
that you’ll never make any further progress once you reach the floor
of a diagonal valley.  In *n* dimensions, there are 2*n*
dimension-aligned directions a valley can descend in, but 2*ⁿ*
precisely diagonal orientations, so in some sense that’s a much harder
problem.

So, for example, the above routine handles this somewhat pathological
problem reasonably well, although it takes it several hundred
iterations; note the incorrect step function:

    c = (3, 1e10, 4, 17, -5)
    climb(lambda g: ((g-c)**2).sum(), lambda: numpy.random.random(5))

But it handles this version much worse, requiring hundreds of
thousands or possibly millions of iterations to solve it — it
gradually exponentially converges on the right answer, but taking
about 80'000 iterations per order of magnitude:

    climb(lambda g: (((g-c)*(1,1,100,1,1))**2).sum(),
          lambda: numpy.random.random(5))

This induces a steep valley along the third dimension, and so the
deltas in the other dimensions like the second and fourth dimensions
suffer a drastically reduced step size, slowing their convergence
enormously (from the outlandish values they took to get close to the
optimum along the second dimension).

It finally found a solution accurate to two decimals on every
dimension in iteration 886'803, after about 15 or 20 minutes of
CPython interpretation:

    886803 [  3.00416293e+00   1.00000000e+10   3.99999237e+00   1.70599240e+01
      -4.95000939e+00] 0.0177569891399

It goes about four times as fast with a non-buggy step function,
converging to that same precision in only 207'804 generations:

    207804 [  3.02129932e+00   1.00000000e+10   3.99999109e+00   1.70184720e+01
      -5.04976604e+00] 0.021740755647

The flagella-style variant described above improves on this by about a
factor of 7:

    28607 [  2.96086659e+00   1.00000000e+10   4.00023842e+00   1.69373547e+01
      -4.95732860e+00] 0.0155987598959

That’s using the following implementation, which additionally is
slightly simpler and only does one loss-function evaluation per
iteration, instead of up to three:

    def climb(f, step):
        size, here = 1, step()
        cost = f(here)

        while True:
            yield here, cost

            where = size * step()
            new = here + where
            new_cost = f(new)
            if new_cost > cost:
                size /= -2
                continue

            # We found a promising direction; swim!
            while True:
                yield new, new_cost
                where *= 2
                new_new = here + where
                new_new_cost = f(new_new)
                if new_new_cost < new_cost:
                    new, new_cost = new_new, new_new_cost
                    size *= 2
                else:
                    break

            here, cost = new, new_cost

And this harness code:

    from __future__ import division, print_function
    import numpy

    if __name__ == '__main__':
        c = (3, 1e10, 4, 17, -5)
        for i, (x, q) in enumerate(climb(lambda g: (((g-c)*(1,1,100,1,1))**2).sum(),
                                         lambda: numpy.random.random(5) - 0.5)):
            print(i, x, q)

As before, it takes four times as long if we leave out the `- 0.5`:

    92241 [  3.04962626e+00   1.00000000e+10   3.99985342e+00   1.69648044e+01
      -4.97438500e+00] 0.00457665876023

Applied to the circle-intersection problem from before, it typically
takes more iterations, like around 30 instead of around 10.  (This is
probably a somewhat smaller penalty than it sounds like, since the
circle-intersection code from earlier is often doing two or three
loss-function evaluations per iteration.)

It solves this geometric square model to a precision of 1e-6 typically
in 1000 to 3000 iterations:

    def square_constraints(points):
        p1, p2, p3, p4 = points[0:2], points[2:4], points[4:6], points[6:]
        side1 = p2 - p1
        side2 = p3 - p2
        side3 = p4 - p3
        side4 = p1 - p4
        return (side1.dot(side2)**2 + side2.dot(side3)**2 + side3.dot(side4)**2
                + side4.dot(side1)**2
                + ((side1**2).sum() - 5**2)**2
                + ((side2**2).sum() - (side3**2).sum())**2
        )

    climb(square_constraints, lambda: 10 * (numpy.random.rand(8) - 0.5))

Without the fourth perpendicularity constraint, though, it converges
very slowly, and the things it converges to don’t look like squares.
One sample result with the fourth perpendicularity constraint left
out:

    141071 [ 2.76119227 -2.36547768 -1.36787743  0.45423421 -1.35017868  0.48015388
     -1.33188753  0.50622078] 9.99823404211e-07

This has minuscule and nearly equal `side2` and `side3` (lengths about
0.032), whose dot product is consequently also very small even though
they’re very nearly parallel, being perpendicular to the
nearly-parallel `side1` and `side4`.  This allows `side1` and `side4`
to minimize the function by becoming more and more nearly equal and
opposite.  It pays to be cautious when defining cost functions, since
optimization algorithms will exploit whatever vulnerabilities they can
find!

I haven’t tried the per-dimension step-size approach above yet, though
it would surely help for these examples.

Relationship to other kinds of optimization algorithms
------------------------------------------------------

See also file `genetic-secants` for a different generic
derivative-free solver for scalar functions of general vector spaces,
that one for zeroes instead of minima.  I think both of these are only
going to be reasonably fast for problems of low dimensionality, but I
think hill-climbing suffers exponentially from high dimensionality,
while the method of secants (like gradient-descent variants) will
suffer only linearly from it.

Of course, you can find local minima of a computable continuous
function by using automatic differentiation on it and using the method
of secants to find a zero of its derivative.

Although the above implementations are not, hill-climbing is
applicable to functions on discrete spaces without any kind of
comparability between elements, such as graphs or strings of symbols.
(That’s the domain.  The range still needs to be comparable.)  The
method of secants requires divisibility and zeroes.  Hill-climbing
also only requires comparability from its cost function — it takes no
notice of its absolute magnitudes, just which values are higher and
lower — and this *is* true of the implementations above.