Lotus Agenda was an interesting program that you could use for
organizing research notes, tracking expenses, scheduling appointments,
and the like.  It gave birth to the “Personal Information Management”
or “PIM” category of software, but it's more flexible than the other
programs in that category.

An unusual thing about Agenda is that it mostly managed text, but at
an intermediate granularity, roughly the granularity of a sentence.
Each “item” was categorized into some set of “categories”, which were
like tags, but were mostly implicitly applied based on matching words
in the text.  The item-category association could have an associated
value, sort of like a spreadsheet cell, with items being the rows and
categories being the columns.

You could have several different views of your items, selecting which
categories you wanted to display as columns, which you wanted to use
to divide the view into sections, and which you wanted to add section
totals to.

Web browsers allow you to navigate and organize text at the level of
pages, while word processors and text editors allow you to navigate
and organize text at the level of letters.  Agenda was born about the
time of Hypercard, long before hypertext became popular, but I’ve been
thinking it would be interesting to have a hypertext system that
worked at the intermediate level where Agenda did.

The key questions here are:

1. Do links lead to views or to items?
2. Are they transclusion links, explicitly activated links, or some of
   each?
3. Are they only embedded in items, or can they also be tag-values?
4. Are categories different from items, or is there just a single type
   of data that embraces both?  An item belonging to a category can
   clearly be represented as a link, of course.
