I’m sitting in a café with a wall covered in embossed tiles, which I
think are plastic painted to look like brass with a heavy patina.
Some parts of the tiles have a sort of leather pattern, while other
parts have raised floral designs and the like.

Despite the enthusiasm for 3-D printing via FDM, most of the things
people make with it have very limited mechanical properties; instead
they primarily are of interest because of their appearance — the
infill is commonly a honeycomb or cross pattern with 60% to 90% empty
space inside the outer shell.  But appearance is mostly a function of
the surface — entirely so, in the case of opaque objects.  So perhaps
a process that shapes only a surface may be of interest.

Single-point incremental forming, or “SPIF”, is an emerging industrial
process for rapid prototyping, which is to say it barely works at all
and it’s slow, but flexible.  The idea is that you clamp a metal sheet
around the edges and poke it with a stick; in cross section in ASCII
art:


     |clamp|     | |            |clamp|
     -------      U             -------
     ----------------------------------
     -------                    -------
     |clamp|                    |clamp|

Where you poke it, you make a divot by stretching (“forming”) the
metal out the other side of the sheet, and if you drag the stick along
the surface without letting up the pressure, you can make a groove.
(Generally you use a rounded-end tool and you lubricate and/or rotate
it to keep it from sticking.)  You can see the same process in action
if you try to write on paper with a ballpoint pen with no ink.

Where this gets interesting is that if you make the groove, say,
circular, the metal inside the groove has nothing pulling it up, so it
gets pulled down to the level of the bottom of the groove, making a
flat circular depression.  Then you can do the process again inside
there to make the depression deeper, and so on.  The same
considerations of thinning, wrinkling, springback, and work-hardening
that apply to deep drawing apply here, but since SPIF is mostly used
for one-offs where you can’t afford the investment to make stamping
dies (though sometimes people use it with dies too) you need to use
FEM software to simulate them.

(The low-tech approach to this whole thing is hammering sheet metal
into shape over a form.)

I was thinking that maybe you could do this with aluminum foil with
really minimal force.  Aluminum foil also has the advantage that it’s
thin enough that you can easily cut it with a spark; and, if you need
to anneal it, you can be sure of a uniform temperature through the
thickness of the material, and since [aluminum doesn’t need a soak
time at high temperatures to anneal it][0], it can be done very
quickly.  (This requires heating to close to the melting point; people
sometimes use burnoff of carbon black on aluminum to indicate that
it’s reached the right temperature.)

[0]: https://www.tinmantech.com/education/articles/aluminum-alloys-annealing.php

SPIF forming of a depression is normally done from the outside in,
with an empty space under the workpiece, which is clamped only at the
edges; this requires workpiece to transmit the load from the forming
tool back all the way to the edges.  A possible improvement may be to
do an initial forming step on a resilient backing, such as a sheet of
rubber, or a disposable one, such as a sheet of cardboard, creating
many parallel grooves with a bit of separation between them; this
produces an accordion-fashion section which can then be unfolded with
much less force once the backing is removd.

Electrotyping may be a particularly appealing next process step to
apply, allowing the soft, easily melted aluminum to give its
precisely-dimensioned form to metals like copper, brass, bronze,
nickel, chromium, gold, or silver; I’m not sure how well electrotyped
coatings will adhere to the aluminum’s passivating oxide layer, and I
don’t think it’s likely for cathodic reduction to eliminate aluminum
oxide in water, but if it doesn’t adhere well, that merely facilitates
the removal of the aluminum for disposal.

Electrotyping is difficult to apply to alloys (whichever metal is
easier to reduce tends to crowd out the other metals), although there
are some processes that can electrodeposit some brasses and bronzes.
But, by the same token, the electrodeposited metal may work well as a
shell to fill with a harder alloy in the molten state.  The easiest
combination is presumably a copper or nickel shell filled with
type-metal, which (as discussed in file `glass-fluxing-3d-printing`
and file `hot-oil-cutter`) melts at 241°, does not shrink upon
solidifying, and does not dissolve iron or steel; I am guessing that
it will not dissolve nickel either.  It probably dissolves copper
pretty well, since lead–tin solder does, but probably not very deeply
in the time before it cools at the surface of the mold.

Copper doesn’t melt until 1084°, and nickel doesn’t melt until 1455°,
meaning that in theory you could fill shells of them with materials of
much higher melting points — including, in the case of nickel, cast
iron (see file `glass-fluxing-3d-printing`), which will definitely
dissolve it.  Dimensional precision may suffer from thermal
contraction, although I seem to recall that cast iron in particular
shares type-metal’s happy property of neither expanding nor
contracting upon solidification.

Various pot-metal alloys (Zamak, etc.) are also an option; in theory
[Zamak] 2 melts at only 379–390° but has a yield strength of 361 MPa,
better than ASTM A36 steel’s 290 MPa (according to file `heck-balls`)
or 250 MPa (according to Wikipedia’s [A36 steel] article), though the
steel beats it at ultimate tensile strength.  I think Zamak is more
expensive than cast iron, though.

[Zamak]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zamak
[A36 steel]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A36_steel