The direct stiffness method of the finite element method turns a
system of springs into a system of linear equations, imposes boundary
conditions by removing some of the variables to make the system
nonsingular, and then solves the system.

If we restrict our attention to systems of Hookean springs in one
dimension connected at nodes, we have essentially two relationships:

- The net force from the springs on any node, except for those held
  fixed by boundary conditions, is zero.
- The force through a spring is its rigidity times the difference in
  displacement between its endpoints.

This immediately suggests comparison to electric circuits.  For example:

- The net current from the resistors into any node is zero, except for
  those connected to current sources.
- The current through a resistor is its conductance times the
  difference in voltage between its endpoints.

And the resulting series, parallel, and bridge laws are the same for
springs and for resistors.

This suggests extending the analogy {force = current, rigidity =
conductance, displacement = voltage, springs = resistors} to other
components.  In this analogy, a dashpot, whose force is its
“dashpoticity” times the rate of change in the displacement between
its endpoints, or equivalently the difference in velocity between its
endpoints, is analogous to a capacitor, whose current is its
capacitance times the rate of change in voltage between its endpoints.
This extends the analogy to the following:

    | Mechanical         | Electrical  |             |                   |
    |--------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------------|
    | force              | current     | F = kd      | I = GV            |
    | stiffness/rigidity | conductance | k = F/d     | G = I/V           |
    | spring             | resistor    |             |                   |
    | displacement       | voltage     | d = F/k     | V = I/G           |
    | dashpot            | capacitor   | F = x dd/dt | I = C dV/dt       |
    | dashpot-stiffness  | capacitance |             | C = Q/V = ∫I dt/V |

For reasons of conservation of energy, an inductor has no passive
mechanical equivalent in this analogy; it would need to have a
displacement proportional to the rate of change of force.

But that’s not the only possible analogy, since other linear circuit
elements (inductors and capacitors) combine in series and parallel in
the same way.  For example, making capacitors instead of resistors
analogous to springs:

- The net charge at any node is zero, except for those connected to
  current sources.
- The charge across a capacitor is its capacitance times the
  difference in voltage between its endpoints.

That is:

    | Mechanical             | Electrical              |     |     |
    |------------------------+-------------------------+-----+-----|
    | spring                 | capacitor               | ??? | ??? |
    | compliance? stiffness? | capacitance? elastance? |     |     |
    | velocity               |                         |     |     |
    | force                  |                         |     |     |

In this analogy (force = charge, displacement = voltage, rigidity =
capacitance) if we differentiate with respect to time, we find that
velocity is rate of change of voltage and FUCK I HAVE NO FUCKING CLUE.
It seems like inductors should be masses, what?  Since they’re 180°
away from springs?  On a mass, the derivative of velocity is force
divided by mass.  On an inductor, the derivative of current is voltage
divided by inductance.  So does that mean {velocity = current, force =
voltage, inductance = mass}?

Presumably you can make the analogy equally valid in exactly the
opposite direction, with springs representing inductors, masses
representing capacitors, and dashpots representing resistors.  In this
analogy, I think charge represents displacement, velocity represents
current, and force represents voltage: the rate of change of
displacement of a mass is its velocity, and the rate of change of
velocity of a mass is the force divided by the mass, thus {force =
voltage, velocity = current, capacitance = mass}.  This is exactly
contradictory to what I came up with in the previous paragraph, so
clearly I am smoking crack.

This analogy has:

    | force        | voltage     |               |               |        |
    | velocity     | current     | v = dd/dt     | I = dQ/dt     |        |
    | displacement | charge      |               |               |        |
    | spring       | inductor    |               |               |        |
    | dashpot      | resistor    |               |               |        |
    | mass         | capacitor   |               |               |        |
    | stiffness    | inductance? | k = F/(dv/dt) | L = V/(dI/dt) | !?!?!? |
    |              |             |               |               |        |

Fuck, I have no idea.
