Now that I've been living here for a year and a half, the electric
utility finally got around to installing an electric meter.  My bill
for the first 31 days, from 2019-10-28 to 2019-11-28, is 68 kWh, and
it works out to AR$497.98.  Most of this, AR$278.94, is the
installation of the meter, although supposedly we'd already paid
AR$2000 for that; the remainder is divided into a "fixed charge",
AR$21.37, and a "variable charge", AR$90.62.  This adds up to
AR$390.93, to which are added a "municipal contribution" of 6.383% or
AR$24.95 and the value-added tax of 21% or AR$82.10, for the total of
AR$497.98.

However, they explain they're actually only charging 15 of the 31
days, perhaps because that's when they installed the meter.  The
"fixed charge" is AR$43.46 per 31 days (presumably this has to do with
maintaining the electrical connection?) while the "variable charge" is
given as a "unit price" of 2.832, which is multiplied by 32 kWh
(apparently 68 multiplied by 15/31 and rounded down, although this
calculation makes no sense) to get AR$90.62.

So, in effect, I'm being charged AR$2.832 per kilowatt hour, plus
27.383% of taxes, for a total of AR$3.60748656 per kilowatt hour.  At
the AR$64.50 per US$ rate that was current last weekend when I checked
the prices in file `powder-bed-3d-printing`, this rounds to
US$0.056/kWh, rounding.  In diagonally printed letters that make it
difficult to read several of the numbers, the bill helpfully explains,
"CONSUMO CON SUBSIDIO DEL ESTADIO NACIONAL", consumption subsidized by
the national government, even though I'm being charged AR$82.10 of VAT
on it.

The new president has just announced a 180-day freeze in electricity
and gas prices, which presumably means that this already relatively
low energy cost will drop by another 15% or so as our currency
inflates --- though whether the drop is 10% or 40% is really anybody's
guess at this point.

68 kWh in 15 days is 190 watts, which is a surprisingly low
consumption level given how much of the time I've had the air
conditioner running, as well as cooking on an electric stove.
Presumably this would be doubled if I had a refrigerator.  The
apartment is wired for 66 amps at 240 V, of which 20 goes to the
stove.  66 amps would be 15.8 kW, which would be US$21.24 per day or
US$646 per month at this price.  Such great consumption might,
however, change the category of service and cause variability in the
fixed charge.

This at last tells me the cost of the energy to run the air
conditioner.  If I can trust the label, it sucks 4.5 amps and delivers
2700 kcal/hour (= 3100 W) of cooling.  4.5 amps at 240 V is 1080 W, so
that's AR$3.90 per hour or, at the moment, US$0.06 per hour.  In all
likelihood, the depreciation on the air conditioner is greater than
that; various similar portable air conditioners cost AR$25000, which
is about 6000 hours of operation.
