I've been trying to puzzle out the libart2 API for antialiased
rendering in `art_svp_render_aa.h`.  I think I understand it now.

Basically, the problem it's trying to solve is that rendering a bunch
of antialiased shapes that share borders is kind of a pain.  

The Alpha-Blending Approach
---------------------------

Rendering one antialiased shape is pretty straightforward: you just
alpha-blend the edges with whatever the background happens to be at
the moment.  Rendering multiple antialiased shapes that are supposed
to share borders, well, you end up with these "cracks" where the
background shows through, as follows.

Suppose you have a black background and two light gray polygons, say
80% white and 90% white, and we're looking at three adjacent pixels,
A, B, and C.  If the border between the two polygons falls neatly
between, say, B and C, then A is 80% white, B is 80% white, and C is
90% white.  No problem.

But suppose the border runs down the middle of B.  Now A is still 80%
white and C is still 90% white, and ideally you'd like B to be
somewhere in between, say 85% white.  But with the alpha-blending
approach, here's what you get.  First, you render the 80% white
polygon, which takes B (currently at 0%) and alpha-blends 80% white
into it with a 50% alpha corresponding to its 50% coverage of B,
leaving B as (B * (1 - 50%) + 80% * 50%) = 40% white.  Then, you
render the 90% white polygon, which also covers B to a 50% extent, and
so B gets ((B = 40%) * (1 - 50%) + 90% * 50%), or 65%.  65% is not
between 80% and 90%.  B's color ought to be composed half and half of
the two polygons' colors, but instead it's composed of three-eighths
of each of their colors and one-quarter the background color.

This is, for example, the approach the `<canvas>` tag in Firefox and
Safari take, and it results in transparency artifacts whenever you try
to do 3-D rendering on top of it.

Other Approaches
----------------

There are other simple approaches you can take.  You can decline to do
antialiasing, or you can do antialiasing by rendering non-antialiased
to a much larger pixel buffer and then downsampling.  You can randomly
sample one or several points inside each pixel rather than just using
the center point.  And `art_svp_render_aa` has a different approach.

`art_svp_render_aa`
-----------------

The most transparent function in `art_svp_render_aa.h` is the following:

    void
    art_svp_render_aa (const ArtSVP *svp,
                       int x0, int y0, int x1, int y1,
                       void (*callback) (void *callback_data,
                                         int y,
                                         int start,
                                         ArtSVPRenderAAStep *steps, int n_steps),
                       void *callback_data);

An ArtSVP is a "sorted vector path", which is the kind of thing you
reduce everything else to in libart as the last step before you try to
render it into pixels.

An ArtSVPRenderAAStep is this:

    struct _ArtSVPRenderAAStep {
      int x;
      int delta; /* stored with 16 fractional bits */
    };

So I made an ArtSVP from an ArtVpath representing a diamond between
(160, 0), (240, 120), (160, 240), and (80, 120), and I called
art_svp_render_aa with a callback that just dumped out the arguments
it got, scaling the delta argument down as suggested by the comment
(and scaling down the 'start' argument in the same way).  The results
looked like this:

    y=0 start=0.5 n_steps=3
      x=159 delta=-85
      x=160 delta=-1.52588e-05
      x=161 delta=85
    y=1 start=0.5 n_steps=5
      x=158 delta=-21.25
      x=159 delta=-212.5
      x=160 delta=-1.52588e-05
      x=161 delta=212.5
      x=162 delta=21.25
    y=2 start=0.5 n_steps=4
      x=158 delta=-170
      x=159 delta=-85
      x=161 delta=85
      x=162 delta=170
...

    y=25 start=0.5 n_steps=6
      x=142 delta=-21.25
      x=143 delta=-212.5
      x=144 delta=-21.25
      x=176 delta=21.25
      x=177 delta=212.5
      x=178 delta=21.25
...


And so on until the last scan line in the region.  It happened that
the x-coordinates were roughly where the boundaries of my shape were
on those scan lines.

It turns out that libart wants your Vpaths to be counterclockwise, and
that's why the values are negative; and the start value is 0.5 to make
rounding work properly.

So this gives you a sort of map of how inside the shape each pixel is.
The start value tells you how inside the shape you are at the start of
the scan line, with 0.5 being "completely outside" and 255.5 being
"completely inside", and the ArtSVPRenderAAStep items tell you where
the degree of insideness changes along that scan line.  You'll notice
that, except on the first line where the scan line kind of gently
touches my shape, the negative numbers always total to 255, as do the
positive numbers, because each scan line goes all the way into the
inside-out shape (once) and all the way back out of it.

So this is sufficient to do antialiased rendering of a single shape in
the dumb alpha-blending approach explained at the top: the start and
delta values give you your alpha, although on kind of a funny scale.
Maybe this is how `art_rgb_svp_alpha` works; I don't have access to the
libart source at the moment.  But you can do it like this:

    struct alpha_blending_shape_info {
      art_u8 *buffer;
      art_u8 r, g, b;  /* foreground! */
      int x0, x1;
      int rowstride;
      enum { even_odd_rule, art_rgb_svp_alpha_rule, interesting_rule } rule;
    };

    // callback for art_svp_render_aa for the antialiased polygon rendering
    void alpha_blending_shape_callback(void *callback_data, int y, int start,
                                       ArtSVPRenderAAStep *steps, int n_steps) {
      struct alpha_blending_shape_info *info = callback_data;
      int value = start;
      int x = info->x0;
      int ii = 0;
      int new_x, alpha;
      for (;;) { // N + 1 fills for N steps
        new_x = (ii < n_steps) ? steps[ii].x : info->x1;
        switch (info->rule) {
        case even_odd_rule:
          alpha = 256 - abs((((unsigned)value >> 16) % 512) - 256);
          break;
        case art_rgb_svp_alpha_rule:
          // same winding rule as art_rgb_svp_alpha.  if I were literate I
          // would probably know what it's called.
          alpha = abs(value >> 16);
          if (alpha > 255) alpha = 255;
          break;
        case interesting_rule:
          // This shows more clearly what's going on under the covers with value.
          alpha = value >> 18;
          break;
        }
        if (alpha) {
          art_rgb_run_alpha(info->buffer + y * info->rowstride + x * 3, 
                            info->r, info->g, info->b, alpha, new_x - x);
        }
      if (ii >= n_steps) break;
        x = new_x;
        value += steps[ii].delta;
        ii++;
      }
    }

The Iterator Interface
----------------------

But there are other functions in `art_svp_render_aa.h` as well:

    ArtSVPRenderAAIter *
    art_svp_render_aa_iter (const ArtSVP *svp,
                            int x0, int y0, int x1, int y1);

    void
    art_svp_render_aa_iter_step (ArtSVPRenderAAIter *iter, int *p_start,
                                 ArtSVPRenderAAStep **p_steps, int *p_n_steps);

    void
    art_svp_render_aa_iter_done (ArtSVPRenderAAIter *iter);

Those look like a classic iterator pattern in C.  First you have a
function to initialize the iterator; then you have a function to step
the iterator and get some output values from it (although no way to
tell when it's exhausted); and a function to discard the iterator when
you're done.

And, as you'd expect, it turns out you can reimplement
`art_svp_render_aa` on top of the iterator interface as follows:

    void svp_render_aa(ArtSVP *svp, 
                       int x0, int y0, int x1, int y1,
                       void (*callback) (void *callback_data,
                                         int y,
                                         int start,
                                         ArtSVPRenderAAStep *steps, int n_steps),
                       void *callback_data) {
      ArtSVPRenderAAIter *iter = art_svp_render_aa_iter(svp, x0, y0, x1, y1);
      int y;
      int start;
      ArtSVPRenderAAStep *steps;
      int n_steps;
      for (y = y0; y < y1; y++) {
        art_svp_render_aa_iter_step(iter, &start, &steps, &n_steps);
        callback(callback_data, y, start, steps, n_steps);
      }
      art_svp_render_aa_iter_done(iter);
    }

And it seems to work the same as the original.  (I wish I had the
source of libart handy; I imagine it's not very different.)

But this iterator interface is useful because it allows you to iterate
through the scan lines of several different shapes, possibly in
different colors, in parallel.  Which means that you can calculate,
for each boundary pixel, what percentage of it is occupied by each
shape.  So you can get results without cracks between them in the case
where the shapes share some border, unlike the alpha-blending
approach, but without using a humongous amount of memory or processor
time, as in the supersampled-rendering approach.

However, the interface still doesn't tell you whether a pixel is 50%
occupied by shape A and 50% occupied by shape B because the two are on
opposite sides of a shared border that runs through the middle of the
pixel, or because shape A has a diagonal border running from upper
left to lower right, while shape B has a diagonal border running from
lower left to upper right, both through the center of the pixel.  So
at least one of those two cases will be rendered incorrectly.  Perhaps
more seriously, if you have two shapes in different colors but with
the same border, the straightforward way of using this information
will give you a jaggy border where the color of the bottom shape leaks
through.  I think you can avoid these cases by cleverly manipulating
the geometry of the shapes so that they do not overlap before you try
to render them.

Additionally, I'd think that if you were using it this way, you would
want some kind of iterator in the x direction over the various
ArtSVPRenderAAStep[]s that describe the scanline you're currently on.
But there doesn't seem to be such an iterator facility defined in
libart.
