As I was adding materials data to file `powder-bed-3d-printing` I
happened across a material I'd never heard of before that seemed like
a better fit for what I was looking for than any of the materials I
*had* heard of: aluminum orthophosphate, the mineral [berlinite].

[berlinite]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Berlinite

I looked into its synthesis, and what I found was absolutely
astounding; I must be missing something important, because it seems
like a fairly revolutionary new material, but no revolution has
resulted in the last 140 years since its discovery.

Berlinite
---------

Berlinite is a rare quartz-like crystal of [aluminum orthophosphate]
with a Mohs hardness of 6.5 and a melting point of 1800°.  It's
nontoxic enough to be used as an antacid, although there are several
other phosphates of aluminum, which are caustic, and a highly toxic
phosphide of aluminum, and sometimes these chemicals are confused with
aluminum orthophosphate; every MSDS I can find states that aluminum
orthophosphate causes severe skin burns, presumably as a result of
this confusion; although I don't have any here to put on my skin,
I think this is very unlikely to be correct.
Its dihydrate is the uncommon turquoise-like mineral
[variscite], which has a Mohs hardness of only 4.5.  It dunts like
quartz, but at 583°.  It wasn't discovered until [1868][webmineral].

[aluminum orthophosphate]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aluminium_phosphate
[variscite]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Variscite
[webmineral]: http://webmineral.com/data/Berlinite.shtml

The really interesting thing about Berlinite is that it's almost as
hard as quartz, but several investigators report easy ways to
synthesize it at much lower temperatures.

Grover *et al.*'s low-temperature synthesis
-----------------------------------------

In 1999 some researchers at Argonne National Lab and Purdue
investigating the problem of safe nuclear waste storage published [a
paper on a berlinite-bonded alumina ceramic][Grover et al.], entitled
"Low-temperature synthesis of berlinite-bonded alumina ceramics".
Their stunning claim was that they had synthesized berlinite *at 150°*
by heating a hydrated aluminum phosphate they made by partly
dissolving alumina in aqueous phosphoric acid at 130°.

[Grover et al.]: https://inis.iaea.org/search/search.aspx?orig_q=RN:33000620 "S. E. Grover, S.Y. Jeong, A. Wagh, and T.R. West  (Aug 1999). (ANL/ET/CP-97994).  11 p; 101. Annual American Ceramic Society Meeting, Symposium on Waste Management Science and Technology in the Ceramic and Nuclear Industries; W-31109-ENG-38. Available from OSTI as DE00011185.  IAEA reference number 33000620, INIS volume 33, issue 1."

In detail, they heated a slurry of alumina (micron-sized mixed with
sand) with 50 wt.% phosphoric acid with an
Al<sub>2</sub>O<sub>3</sub>:H<sub>3</sub>PO<sub>4</sub> weight ratio
of 5:1, detected an endothermic reaction at 118° with differential
thermal analysis, held it at 130° for 1, 2, or 4 days to allow the
reaction to complete, identified with X-ray diffraction that it
produced an intermediate phase of another aluminum phosphate
AlH<sub>3</sub>(PO<sub>4</sub>)<sub>2</sub>.H<sub>2</sub>O mixed with
the remaining alumina; they described the mixture as "a thick
puttylike...gel", which they left at ambient temperature for another
week "so that some crystalline growth would occur".  They dried the
samples into "hard monoliths", which "disintegrated when placed in
water".

All of the above had been done by previous researchers.  But then they
baked the "monoliths" at 150° for one, two, and three days:
"Significant porosity developed in the monoliths as bound water
escaped through an increasingly viscous slurry."  They infer that the
hot monoaluminum phosphate reacted with *more* of the remaining
alumina to produce berlinite over the course of these days, and
explain, "the resultant ceramic appeared to be a very hard monolith
with dense phases separated by large pores," with some solid
phosphoric acid on top; they measured a compressive strength of 6824
psi (47.05 MPa in modern units) on materials with "20.9 vol.% open
porosity".  This is a bit stronger than ordinary concrete but not
remarkably so, and much lower than high-performance concrete.

Mysteriously, this paper has been almost entirely ignored.  It's been
cited in 2019 by [US patent 10,233,803B2] on exhaust-gas filters with
a catalyst film on a porous ceramic support (and its related 2017
applications in .de, .br, .uk, .cn, .kr, the WIPO PCT ("WO") and the
EPO ("EP")); in 2006 by [US patent 6,858,174B2] on gel-casting ceramic
slurries; by [Stefania CASSIANO GASPAR's dissertation] in 2013 at
INSA-Lyon on extruding porous berlinite-bonded alumina ceramic
supports for catalyst films (in French) for exhaust-gas filtering; by
her 2012 patent ([US 9,227,873B2]) with four other co-authors on the
same subject; and by [a 2015 Russian paper].

[US patent 10,233,803B2]: https://patents.google.com/patent/US10233803B2/en
[US patent 6,858,174B2]: https://patents.google.com/patent/US6858174B2/en
[Stefania Cassiano Gaspar's dissertation]: https://www.theses.fr/2013ISAL0056
[US 9,227,873B2]: https://patents.google.com/patent/US9227873B2/en
[a 2015 Russian paper]: https://elibrary.ru/item.asp?id=25761558 "ТЕХНОЛОГИЯ БЕЗОБЖИГОВЫХ КЕРАМИЧЕСКИХ ТРУБЧАТЫХ ИЗДЕЛИЙ ('Technology of Refrigerated Ceramic Tubular Products'), by ШАЯХМЕТОВ У.Ш1, ХАЙДАРШИН Э.А.1, ТРЕТЬЯКОВА В.С1, ХИСМАТУЛЛИН М.Г.1"

Cassiano Gaspar's dissertation also cites some 2010 work by Lee *et
al.* with zeolites in aluminum phosphate, which she reports they got
to be nonporous.

So, why do I think this is such an interesting result?  It gives a
simple, low-temperature
recipe for a moldable porous material that costs about US$3/kg and
produce a result as strong as ordinary concrete, which costs a tenth
of that.  What's so special about that?  After all, if you want
concrete with alumina abrasives in it, you can put some alumina in
your concrete.

Well, a couple of things.  First, this material is
highly refractory, despite its low-temperature preparation; it
will not spall from heat shocks.  Second, I think it's nontoxic and
noncaustic, unlike portland cement.  It might even be biocompatible,
which conventional phyllosilicate ceramics are not; [alumina is
well-known to be biocompatible][Ceram], phosphate as such is nontoxic,
and so the potential biocompatibility concern would mostly be with
whether it releases aluminum into the body, catalyzes harmful
reactions, or provokes inflammation.

In addition to its use for making massive objects, the resulting
berlinite may work well as a binder for connecting aluminum parts
together or for a mineral paint similar to those made from waterglass.

[Ceram]: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29772987

Apparently without citing Grover *et al.*, monoaluminum phosphate is
[sold as a castable refractory][Prayon], sometimes using the heinous
abbreviation "MALP" (to distinguish it from "MAP", monoaluminum
phosphate).  Fosbind is one brand.  [Luz, Oliveira, Gomes, and
Pandolfelli] reviewed its properties, calling it MAP, in a 2016 paper,
using 200-micron dead-burnt magnesia and a s00per seekrit 31337 boron
source to get it to set in 90-120 minutes, finding that they would
work well up to 1400°-1500°; they cite a book (_Technology of
Monolithic Refractories_, Nishikawa) and two papers on the subject in
1982-1989, and point out that it's easier to get aluminum phosphates
if your aluminum source is aluminum hydroxide instead of alumina.

[Prayon]: http://www.prayon.com/en/our-activities/products/industrial-applications/refractories.php
[Luz, Oliveira, Gomes, and Pandolfelli]: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/294422740_Monoaluminum_phosphate-bonded_refractory_castables_for_petrochemical_application "Monoaluminum phosphate-bonded refractory castables for petrochemical application"

Interestingly, Luz *et al.* give a different formula for "monoaluminum
phosphate": Al(H<sub>2</sub>PO<sub>4</sub>)<sub>3</sub>, which is
presumably dramatically more acidic than the
AlH<sub>3</sub>(PO<sub>4</sub>)<sub>2</sub> Grover *et al.* observed,
since its phosphate groups still have their second hydrogen.  Also Luz
*et al.* experimented with binder systems including
Al<sub>2</sub>O<sub>3</sub>/H<sub>3</sub>PO<sub>4</sub> in 2015, and
found that the most effective recipe was 48 wt.% phosphoric acid with
the hydroxide.  They claim that their X-ray diffraction results show
that the aluminum orthophosphate was hydrated (i.e., variscite, not
berlinite).  For different compositions, they report *flexural*
strengths in the 10 to 30 MPa range; presumably the compressive
strength is much greater.

Silicon phosphate
-----------------

It would be interesting if silica can somehow be phosphated
the same way; normally the answer is no, and phosphoric-acid etching
is a normal way to get silicon nitride off of silicon dioxide.  But
[silicon orthophosphate], Si<sub>3</sub>PO<sub>4</sub>, does exist.
Apparently it's caustic, which suggests that it isn't waterproof,
which makes it immediately much less interesting.

Often the reason for wanting to use silica rather than alumina is that
alumina costs 300 times as much as silica (see file
`powder-bed-3d-printing` for materials pricing).  But in this case
that reason is not nearly as overriding, because phosphoric acid is
nearly as expensive as alumina.

[silicon orthophosphate]: https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/Silicon-phosphate-_Si3_PO4_4

Extrusion 3-D printing
----------------------

The inexpensive 3-D printers that have become popular recently,
descended from the RepRap project, are "fused deposition modeling"
printers: they feed a filament into a melting chamber to produce
pressure to force it out a small heated opening (the chamber and the
opening are collectively the "hotend"), moving the opening and the
workpiece relative to each other to deposit material in controlled
positions on the object produced.  Typically they use low-melting
polylactide plastic at temperatures of 185° to 225°.  Although higher
temperatures are sometimes used, most organic chemicals start to break
down into simpler substances in the 230° to 270° range.  Other popular
plastics include PETG, ABS, and nylon (PA6 I think, maybe 6,6.)

There are variants of this process that work well for clay bodies,
clay slips, and adobe, largely relying on thixotropic or plastic
yielding of the material with some kind of extrusion screw rather than
melting.  Instead of stressing the "hotend" with heat, these variants
instead abrade it.

This approach should be applicable to the pasty aluminum phosphate
Grover described, but it is somewhat complicated.  If you use alumina
as the aluminum source, the alumina particles are highly abrasive;
only a very small number of coatings (diamond, CBN, and maybe
zirconia, carborundum, and tungsten carbide) can resist being ground
away by them, and frequent replacement of consumable liners and
nozzles may be the only viable alternative.  Also, the aluminum
phosphates other than the orthophosphate are highly acidic and
consequently corrosive.
