Things in Dercuano that would be big if true
============================================

<div style="font-size: 3em; text-align: center">
if (true) {
</div>

As I pointed out in [the Dercuano introductory text](../index.html),
Dercuano contains much that is correct and original, but mostly what
is original is not correct, and what is correct is not original.  I
think that phrase originated as a clever insult to somebody’s poor
work, but in a sense it’s just the default state of human cognition:
most of the new ideas we come up with are wrong, while most of our
ideas are not new, and since correct ideas have better memetic fitness
(all else being equal) our unoriginal ideas tend toward correctness.
With enough focused effort it’s possible to figure out which original
ideas are true, and if I were capable, I would have made that effort
before making Dercuano public, but I haven’t managed it in many years.

On the other hand, there’s a third axis along which ideas can be
evaluated, aside from (probable) correctness and originality:
consequences or interestingness.

What’s a big idea?  What are consequences?
------------------------------------------

In `3d-printing-stone`, for example, it says that in Argentina in
2017, ordinary gray portland cement cost US$0.26 per kg, while the
white grade cost about three times as much.  Conceivably nobody has
made this observation before, and quite probably it is a correct
observation, so it is likely correct and, in a minimal sense,
original.  But it really matters very little whether the price ratio
was 1:2 or 1:3 or 1:4 in Argentina in 2017, though conceivably that
may someday be of interest to some historian of concrete; this
knowledge enhances your capabilities very little.

At the other end of the spectrum, consider Becquerel’s observation in
1896 that, even in the dark, potassium uranyl sulfate blackened
photographic plates left nearby, as if they were spontaneously
emitting X-rays, which of course they were.  The observation was
hardly more *creative* than my note above about the ratio of prices of
different kinds of cement, merely an observation of an unexpected and
unexplained labwork problem in a footnote of a paper.  However, upon
further investigation, this observation answered the mystery of how
the sun could keep burning for billions of years; provided a source of
energy that did not emit CO₂ and required a tiny amount of fuel to a
substantial part of humanity; made it possible to send space probes to
the outer planets; changed the nature of warfare and ended World War
II; revealed the existence of entirely unsuspected types of matter in
the universe; and was a key part of the evidence for special
relativity, which revealed that mass and energy were not two separate
quantities, but the same quantity.

But the consequences of an idea are very situational, whether we’re
talking about its logical consequences (the other propositions that
its truth would entail) or its practical consequences (the results in
the contingent world of its putative truth becoming known).

From the proposition, “Socrates is a man,” we cannot deduce that
Socrates is mortal; nor can we deduce it from the proposition, “All
men are mortal.”  But if either proposition is known, the other has as
a logical consequence the proposition that Socrates is mortal.  So it
is that the logical consequences of an idea depend on what else is
known.

The practical consequences of Hero’s aeolipile were, famously, almost
nil; but under somewhat different historical circumstances,
steam-engines revolutionized industry in the 18th century.  Condorcet
voting made no impact on the USA’s political processes for at least
two centuries, and the USA continues electing incompetent demagogues;
Condorcet voting ensures that Debian’s project leaders are widely
respected.  Oil drilling in the Song dynasty lowered the price of
salt; oil drilling in Pennsylvania made horse-drawn carriages
obsolete.  Cellphones in the US were relegated to executive status
toys until the 2000s; cellphones in India allowed farmers and
fishermen to capture what were previously middlemen’s profits.
Movable type in the Song enabled the preservation of much of the
Chinese literary canon, while movable type in Europe gave birth to the
Reformation, liberalism, and the Westphalian state.  So it is that the
practical consequences of an idea depend on what else is practiced.

Here I’m not concerned with the practical consequences of “big ideas”
that turned out to be false, like the inevitable withering away of the
socialist state or the inevitable triumph of Daesh over “Rome”, but
only ideas whose consequences would be big *if true*.

So, what ideas in Dercuano could have big consequences, if they turn
out to be correct?  And why?

Self-replication
----------------

One of the main themes of the last several years of Dercuano has been
“clanking replicators” — more precisely [autotrophic programmable
self-replicating 3-D printers](../topics/self-replication.html), and
especially how to achieve autotrophic replication of the control
computer necessary to control the printer’s actuators.

A workable self-replication design is big, if true, because it totally
upends the principles of economics, in a way which I think will
substantially improve the material well-being of the average human by
reducing opportunities for oppression.  I think the change will be
more important than the Industrial Revolution, more important than the
development of agriculture, possibly more important than fire.  I go
into somewhat more detail on the expected economic effects in
`exponential-technology-and-capital`, `gardening-machines`, and
`self-replication-changes`, and there’s a fictionalized near-future
scenario of less-radical digital fabrication technology in
`future-economics`.

However, on looking at `tech-predictions`, it’s obvious that my
ability to forecast what the future holds is pretty poor, and strongly
affected by wishful thinking.

The benefit of self-replicating 3-D printers in practice will be
limited by the price of energy, whether that price is measured in a
conventional way with currency or in more fundamental terms of natural
resources, labor power, and capital investment.  So the explosive
growth of solar energy, its concomitant drop in price, and its other
properties, has been a theme I’ve taken many notes on, including
`solar-economics`, `energy-future`, `japan-energy-autarky`, and parts
of `underground-arcology`.

The problem of self-replication can be crudely divided into the
problem of designing a *cyclic fabrication system*, a term I’m
possibly abusing to mean a set of material-processing, part-forming,
and assembly processes which individually consume one another’s
outputs but collectively consume only natural materials; and the
special problem of how to put together a *computing system* that’s
fast and reliable enough to direct the cyclic fabrication system to
produce the desired product, without requiring exotic materials and
geometries those processes can’t themselves produce.  In particular,
alternatives to the very challenging processes used to fabricate
modern mass-produced semiconductors would be very welcome, keeping in
mind that the economics are very different.

An overview of the whole problem is in `simplified-computing`.

So I explored alternative digital logic technologies in
`mechanical-computers`, `mechanical-computers-2`, `topics-2014`,
`simple-state-machines`, `wheel-state-machine`,
`magnetoresistive-relay`, `laser-logic`, `planar-state-machine`,
`transmission-line-diode-computation`, `diode-logic`, `snap-logic`,
`hall-effect-logic`, `nonlinear-differential-amplification`,
`paper-foil-relays`, and `non-inverting-logic`, largely with an eye to
things that could be built without million-dollar semiconductor fabs.
File `clanking-replicators` touches on this a bit too.

In another direction, though, the topic
[control](../topics/control.html) largely talks about
negative-feedback control, including speculative sensor approaches
like `charge-transfer-servo`, `starfield-servo`, and
`v-plotter-servo`, as well as codesigning physical and control systems
for feedback control in `inverse-filtering-control`; and things like
`differential-spiral-cam` cover control systems that aren’t purely
digital, which could reduce the demands on the digital part of the
system.

When it comes to the materials-processing side of things, I’ve done
some overviews like `automated-fabrication-and-3d-printing-outlook`
and much of the notes in `book-in-itself`.  I’ve come to the
conclusion that Minecraft is misleading; you start with fire, then
clay.  Any practical *terrestrial* cyclic fabrication system will
probably begin with clay ceramic.  So in addition to the
[materials](../topics/materials.html) category, there’s a
[ceramic](../topics/ceramic.html) category, and
`clay-fabrication-objectives` talks specifically about what to do for
clay, and `glass-fluxing-3d-printing` and `flux-deposition` talk a bit
about some processes that I think might work well.  More broadly, the
[manufacturing](../topics/manufacturing.html) category has notes on
many different manufacturing processes, and [digital
fabrication](../topics/digital-fabrication.html) has notes on digital
fabrication processes, some existing and some speculative.  File
`elastic-metamaterials` talks about workarounds for the limitations of
inorganic materials at room temperature, while `plastic-cutters`
describes a way to minimize the amount of very hard material needed if
cutting is one of the processes in the CFS.

Other notes on existing or possible material-shaping processes include
`hot-wire-saw`, `string-cutting-cardboard`, `hot-oil-cutter`,
`regenerative-fuel-air-cutting`, `zinc-pcbs`, `filled-fdm`,
`hot-air-ice-shaping`, `friction-cutting-plastic`,
`aluminum-foil-spif`, and `sun-cutter`.  File `freeze-distillation` is
a possible material-refinement process, and `spark-particulate-sieve`
covers a possible way to make an air or water filter or mesh for
grading solid powders.  File `cold-plasma-oxidation` describes a
process that is commonly used today for surface treatments, but which
I think can also be used for some kinds of cutting and 3-D printing.
And at the end of `caustics` and in `arbitrary-light-transfers` there
are some brief speculations on optical-surface fabrication.

Assembly processes like those explored in `building-blocks` are useful
not just for humans, but also potentially for machines, as they can
produce macroscopic tight tolerances using low-precision assembly
processes.  “Voxel printers” is a recent marketing buzzword related to
this.

So, in these areas, what in Dercuano might be an idea with big
consequences, such as enabling autotrophic self-replication?  Because
probably `zinc-pcbs` isn’t it — I mean, even if it does work, it’s
probably only an incremental improvement.

One idea in there with huge *logical* consequences is that the growth
of solar photovoltaic energy will make energy much cheaper than it’s
ever been.  XXX I should probably break this out into its own section
because it’s not about self-replication.

The family of 3-D printing processes described in `flux-deposition` is
applicable to many areas and should extend the range of additive 3-D
printing significantly.  By my count, at present, it discusses some 27
candidate combinations of materials; I have confidence that at least
some of them should work.  If they are tried soon, and work, that
could be a significant advance; presumably if nobody tries them until
2152 it will be a different story.

Any of the optics-fabrication processes described in `jello-printing`,
`caustics`, `arbitrary-light-transfers`, and
`glass-fluxing-3d-printing` would be a substantial advance over
existing methods if they work, and this would have significant
consequences for achievable optics, entirely apart from
self-replication.  XXX then it should be a separate section too

If one of the numerous alternatives to semiconductor logic mentioned
above works reliably, can work at at least a MHz or so, and can be
fabricated under less demanding conditions, that would also be big, if
true — again, if tried soon enough.  Again, there are enough of them
that it’s almost guaranteed that some of them will work.

Sensors
-------

The [sensors](../topics/sensors.html) category right now consists of
five big ideas.

File `starfield-servo` outlines a way to make some simple physical
objects and less-simple algorithms that would enable a cheap webcam to
become a remote multiple-degree-of-freedom sensor with, in some
dimensions, submicron resolution over a range of a few meters.  If it
works, and I think it will.

File `compressed-sensing-microscope` describes the same technique
applied to light microscopy, where it should enable subwavelength
near-field imaging without lenses.

File `string-instrument-servo` outlines a totally different way to
measure submicron displacements over a range of a few meters with
inexpensive equipment — electric-guitar pickups, this time, rather
than webcams.

File `tinkerers-tricorder` outlines a variety of hacks to build an
inexpensive LCR meter similar to the popular M328.

File `ghettobotics` (and category
[ghettobotics](../topics/ghettobotics.html)) explores how to build

>  a self-sustaining industrial economy that consumes nothing but
>  discarded electronics and other trash and produces, with a minimal
>  amount of human effort, useful robots.

It’s sort of Self Replication Lite™.

Archival
--------

The [archival](../topics/archival.html) category covers lots of
possible ways to archive the humans’ knowledge to keep it from being
lost, at many levels of the stack: physical substrates for
information, ways of mass-producing the physical substrates to reduce
chances they will all be destroyed, file-format compatibility, and
archival virtual machines to guarantee file-format compatibility.

XXX
