I think you can write `flatMap` and thus `map` and `filter` as
higher-order functions in the backtracking monad if you have
`call/cc`.  The iterator just takes a next-continuation and a
fail-continuation (or end-continuation) as arguments.  `flatMap` then
takes a function f and an iterator i and invokes the iterator i with a
next-continuation it makes up, and the same end-continuation.  The new
next-continuation invokes f with the item to get an iterator j and
then invokes j with the original next-continuation and a new
end-continuation it makes up, which returns from the made-up
next-continuation.  Then `map` and `filter` are simply invocations of
this `flatMap` with slightly modified functions.

This structure allows you to do flatMap (and Python generator
expressions) without arbitrary intermediate storage and therefore
without a heap.  In fact, I suspect you can do it quite easily without
a heap in assembly language, piling up the various stack frames of the
dynamic nesting structure of iterators by pushing the stack pointer
lower and lower, resuming back and forth between the various
coroutines by storing and restoring PC and BP and whatever other
callee-saved registers your ABI requires.

Normally, I suppose, the fail continuation would just be the regular
return path.

This idea turns out to be central to [Raph Levien’s Io
language](http://canonical.org/~kragen/raph-io); although `flatMap` is
not in the Io material I've seen (which does not include the original
paper) it is very short to define, though to my mind somewhat tricky:

    flat-map: -> f items k1;
        k1 -> return yield;
        items return -> item next;
        f item -> transformed-items;
        transformed-items next -> transformed-item next-transformed-item;
        yield transformed-item;
        next-transformed-item.

Here I have omitted as extraneous (and possibly ambiguous) the parens
around action-valued variables as arguments that are used in the
original paper; and I am using the convention from the paper that
streams take as arguments first the return-continuation and then the
yield-continuation.  So, for example, the return-continuation for
transformed-items is the resumption continuation for the items stream.

You can write `map` and `filter` in terms of `flat-map`, but you can
also write them from scratch; we can use Levien’s convention that a
boolean function takes if-true and if-false continuation parameters.

    map: -> f items k1;
        k1 -> return yield;
        items return -> item next;
        f item -> transformed-item;
        yield item;
        next.

    filter: -> f items k1;
        k1 -> return yield;
        items return -> item next;
        f item (yield item; next) next.

(Oh dude!  Raph put the paper online at
<http://www.levien.com/pubs/io_a_new_programming_notation.pdf>!  That
clears up a couple of my confusions.)
