

A tale of three hobbies: the bad, the good, and the ugly
--------------------------------------------------------

Suppose almost everyone in the world worked really hard to get better
at football as a hobby, instead of wasting their time watching TV or
getting angry about politics.  The level of professional football
games would improve, but there would still be about the same number of
professional football games; maybe a little more diversity, but just
as today, most people would watch the matches of the top clubs and not
the much larger number of bush-league matches.  So the overall
well-being of the world would increase, but only a little.

Suppose that, instead, almost everyone in the world worked really hard
to get good at medicine as a hobby — doing paramedic training, reading
case studies, predicting patient outcomes, doing Gwern-style
double-blind self-experiments, performing recreational plastic surgery
on their pets, that kind of thing.  The level of health care would
improve dramatically — deaths due to drug interactions the prescribing
physician failed to notice would go way down, people’s decisions about
when to go to the emergency room would be much more accurate, people’s
lifestyle choices would become slightly healthier, and medical science
would advance much more rapidly.  The overall well-being of the world
would increase substantially.

On the gripping hand, suppose that almost everyone in the world worked
really hard to get good at fighting with kitchen knives.  Perhaps the
level of Olympic fencing would improve substantially, which would make
for enjoyable TV — though perhaps the sports are far enough apart that
it wouldn’t transfer — but it’s also likely that a larger fraction of
fights would involve knives instead of just shouting or fists, usually
killing one or more people.  The training, too, would probably involve
a certain number of accidental fatalities, and some fraction of those
would lead to revenge killings.  More children would be orphaned.  The
overall well-being of the world would diminish.

On this basis, I claim that it would be better for almost everyone to
take up medicine as a hobby than football, and better football than
knife fighting; and this is because knife-fighting is a negative-sum
game, football is a zero-sum game, and medicine is a positive-sum
“game”.

“Party on, and be excellent to each other,” Kant, and robbing old women
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

As I remember, sage Dave Long at some point unpacked the Bill and Ted
philosophy as follows: “party on” means not to engage in negative-sum
“games” — in the very general sense of “interactions with other
agents” — and “be excellent” means to engage in positive-sum games.
To the extent that you can control which “games” you “play”, it is
better to invest your limited time in positive-sum games.  (Sage
Shakyamuni reportedly took the alternative position that you should
not waste your time playing any games, because you are going to die
soon, while the sages of Wyld Stallyns instead played games to defeat
death itself.)

Of course, a person may find themself in a situation where it is more
advantageous to them personally to direct their effort to a zero-sum
game or a negative-sum game.  Consider the thief who spotted my
neighbor, an old woman, at the bus stop last month, and decided to
knock her down and beat her to steal $300 from her (about US$7).  He
chose to direct his efforts to robbing her, and although he injured
her in the process, he presumably considered that a worthwhile
tradeoff, because it satisfied his desires for food or crack or
whatever.  A pyramid-scheme participant who recruits downstream
members is doing the same thing, but in a less courageous way, and the
injury is delivered via deception to the victim’s mind, rather than
via a stick to her knee.

From a consequentialist point of view, this is a bad outcome if we
consider the thief and their victim to be equally important, so that
the loss of money by one is precisely canceled by the gain of money by
the other, while the putative injury or deception has no such
counterbalancing benefit.  If the consequentialist considers the
thief’s profit to be more important — perhaps because the thief is
poorer and therefore benefits more from the money, or perhaps because
they subscribe to a worldview where it is better for the money to go
to a deserving thief, because of his bravery, rather than a cowardly
victim, or simply because they are racist — then the consequentialist
can justify the theft as morally correct.  But an *egalitarian*
consequentialist cannot so justify theft or any other negative-sum
game.

Neither can a deontologist who subscribes to Kant’s categorical
imperative, which is of course (XXX) one of Kant’s first examples; the
thief cannot at the same time will that the victim should steal their
money back, delivering the same beating to the thief, because that
would leave the thief bruised but no richer.  Only by some kind of
special pleading can the Kantian thief save his livelihood, and the
same kinds of special pleading that the consequentialist could use to
justify the theft can be used to exempt the thief from the maxim that
would otherwise strip his stolen money from him.  Again, this logic
applies equally well to any negative-sum game.

For an egalitarian consequentialist, the imperative to “be
excellent” — to play positive-sum games rather than zero-sum
games — is just as strong as the imperative to “party on”, that is,
not play negative-sum games.  Kant (and most deontologist theories)
also regard it as a “perfect duty”, and thus obligatory, to “party on”
in every possible way — at least in the specific examples Kant
gives — but regard it as a supererogatory “imperfect duty” to “be
excellent”.

Computer security, the nuclear arms race, advertising, and SEO
--------------------------------------------------------------

In theory, since computers only do what you program them to do, you
can not program them to accept arbitrary commands from random people
anywhere on the internet, instead only programming them to accept
arbitrary commands from their actual owners.  That is, there is no
need for software to contain security holes.  Computer security
violations are not inevitable.  They are the result of undiscovered
programming mistakes, which is why the most significant forum for
announcing and fixing security holes in the 1990s was called BUGTRAQ.

In the late 1990s I spent some effort finding security holes in
software and reporting them to get them fixed.  Unfortunately, it
became increasingly apparent that the current economic and
intellectual environment was going to introduce new security holes
faster than we could remove them, so rather than a gradually
decreasing pool of still-undiscovered security holes, we have a
gradually increasing one, with the disastrous effects on the human
right to privacy documented by the Snowden revelations.

In such an environment, exploit users and defenders are in a sort of
arms race, a literal race to see who can respond faster.  If the
defender is faster to patch a newly discovered hole in deployed
systems, they win that round; if the exploit user is faster to acquire
and employ an exploit for it, they win that round.  So whenever one
side or the other increases their commitment of resources and gets
ahead a bit, the other side has the option of matching that increase
to get back to the previous equilibrium.

This sounds like a zero-sum game, but in a larger context, it’s
negative-sum: the human effort spent on the vulnerability treadmill is
taken from the time available for making music, discovering new
algorithms, cooking food, meditating, painting pictures, writing
poetry, reading poetry, watching movies, making love, or raising
children.  Every sysadmin on call who has to patch the production
systems within an hour so that exploit users won’t break in with the
newly announced vulnerability is spending the irreplaceable minutes of
their life on a Red Queen’s race with the spies at the NSA or the FSB.
They are falling short of partying on.

Of course, neither side can unilaterally scale back its efforts; that
would amount to surrender.  If it’s your job to keep your employer’s
public-facing systems up to date so they don’t get popped, you can’t
just decide it’s not worth the effort.  But you can find a new job.

There are other drawbacks as well: it’s no longer a viable option to
continue running outdated software unless it’s in a very unusual
isolated environment, like a non-networked video game, and the
increasingly rapid and frequent response required to new
vulnerabilities has the effect of centralizing both patching and
exploit use in large organizations.  This means everyone is exposed to
the risks of deploying untested new software on short notice and to
having strangers administer their most intimate computer systems, such
as Android hand computers.  Also, sometimes patching a vulnerability
unavoidably introduces incompatibilities, causing bitrot.

So I stopped spending effort on that.

The nuclear arms race during the Cold War had a similar dynamic: each
side constantly worked to preserve a second-strike capability (by,
among other things, building enough warheads that some would be likely
to survive a first strike from the other side) and to find ways to
remove the other side’s second-strike capability.  Neither side could
opt out of the game, but the result of both sides playing it harder
and harder was the decades-long threat that civilization could end at
any time, with 20 minutes of warning.

Fortunately there were also people on both sides like Jonas Salk,
Norman Borlaug, and Andrey Kolmogorov who were able to dedicate their
lives to positive-sum games instead of the negative-sum game of the
nuclear arms race.

Commercial competition is, in theory, a positive-sum game, though
eventually only slightly so — as more and higher-frequency
participants in a stock market means fairer prices, with retail
participants having to pay much narrower spreads to the market-makers,
more competition in consumer-goods markets should result in goods
priced just above the lowest possible marginal cost of production.
One reason this doesn’t happen in practice is advertising: consumers
buy goods that are advertised rather than equivalent goods that are
not, and in many cases are induced to buy categories of goods they
wouldn’t have bought at all without advertising.
