I just tore down a broken DVD player I found on the street.  It has
three motors in it, two of which are geared to some kind of
linear-motion slide; but all three of them seem to be just DC motors
with no builtin servo.

Accurately positioning a linear-motion slide is a big part of what you
need for various kinds of machinery, so I immediately got to thinking
about how you could do it.

Aside from the most obvious things (the optical tape sensor from a
printer, using a webcam, using the inverse square law with LED and
photodiode) it occurred to me that the plastic slide itself probably
has a relative permittivity of two or three, and so if you could
arrange metal plates fixed in place on each side of it, you'd have a
variable capacitor.  Better, you could put one metal plate on its
surface and another one fixed in place above or below it, with a layer
of plastic between them keeping them from touching as they slide
against each other.  This would give you a capacitance varying from
the femtofarad range to the 1000-picofarad range with the motion of
the slide.

Charge-transfer sensing supposedly allows inexpensive measurement of
variable capacitances to precisions of fractions of a femtofarad.  If
that's really true in this case, it should allow the inexpensive
measurement of such a variable capacitor to some six significant
figures, or 20 bits, of precision.  If this were to be fully
transferred to the positional precision of the slide — that is, if
nothing else affected the capacitance than the position of the slide —
then we would be capable of measuring the 13-centimeter motion of the
slide to within 130 nanometers, about 1300 atoms.  Sufficiently
intelligent motor control, then, might be capable of *positioning* the
slide to within 130 nanometers, although due to the many sources of
slack and vibration in the system, surely not arbitrary motion paths
with such precision.

