(See also file `graph-construction`.)

I was thinking there must be a way to write down circuit diagrams in
an expression-like textual string in a compact way.  This ["example
circuits and netlists"][0] page gives the following example netlist
for SPICE:

    Multiple dc sources
    v1 1 0 dc 24
    v2 3 0 dc 15
    r1 1 2 10k
    r2 2 3 8.1k
    r3 2 0 4.7k
    .end

[0]: http://www.allaboutcircuits.com/textbook/reference/chpt-7/example-circuits-and-netlists/

That defines two voltage sources, three resistors, and four nets
(nodes).  But it’s a purely series-parallel circuit.  If we use | for
parallel composition, mere concatenation for series, ' for inversion,
and [] for grouping, we could write it as `V 24 R 10k [R 4.7k | R 8.1k
[V 15]']`, which I think would be a huge improvement.  Better still,
without the component values, that's just `VR[R|RV']`.

You’d still need some way to handle circuits that aren’t purely
series-parallel, that aren’t circuits, or that contain
non-two-terminal elements.  For example, further down, we have this
bridge-rectifier circuit:

    fullwave bridge rectifier
    v1 1 0 sin(0 15 60 0 0)
    rload 1 0 10k
    d1 1 2 mod1
    d2 0 2 mod1
    d3 3 1 mod1
    d4 3 0 mod1
    .model mod1 d
    .tran .5m 25m
    .plot tran v(1,0) v(2,3) 
    .end

That’s not series-parallel.  But you could imagine defining a
particular two-terminal chunk of it that occurs in more than one path
through the circuit as `rload = R 10k; V ac 15 60 [D rload D | D'
rload D']`.

Alternatively you could do what we do in programming languages with
gotos, where the named entities are not subgraphs we wish to traverse
and return from (like functions) but labels for points in the
control-flow graph.  Suppose we mark them with an `@` suffix to
distinguish them.  Then we might write that circuit as `ra@ R 10k rb@;
V ac 15 60 [D ra@ D' | D' rb@ D]`, which is slightly shorter but maybe
less clear.  It’s not quite clear what to do when you want a branch to
*end* in such a label rather than to merely include it.  This does,
however, provide a more reasonable way to handle three-terminal
elements.

In both of these cases, the stuff before a semicolon is special in
that it’s in some sense mere definitions; it's what’s after the last
semicolon that gives the circuit.

Right now I’m looking at a diagram of an energy-harvesting circuit in
a 2003 paper which could be written as follows:

    q1@ [I ac | C] q2@; [D' q1@ D' | D' q2@ D' | C] S [D' | L [ C | [V'|R] R]]

which, as you can plainly see, is a capacitive (piezoelectric) current
source feeding into a bridge rectifier powering a buck converter to
charge a battery, with the buck converter controller being represented
by a plain switch.

Without spaces, that would be the rather awful
`q1@[Iac|C]q2@;[D'q1@D'|D'q2@D'|C]S[D'|L[C|[V'|R]R]]`.

It would be very nice to be able to render such expressions into
schematics (and SPICE netlists) automatically.

Stack machines
--------------

An alternative approach would be to add circuit elements using
stack-machine operations.  In this approach, `R` is a stack operation
which takes a node off the operand stack, attaches a resistor to it
(of a specified value, if one is present), and returns a newly created
node at the other end of the resistor.  `D` and `D'` are stack
operations which attach diodes in opposite directions.

Three-terminal devices fit comfortably — although there are more
potential ways to define them, as their terminals could conceivably be
assigned to inputs and outputs in 18 different fashions.  The most
general form is to merely push all of their terminals onto the stack
as fresh nodes; given that and some stack manipulation operations, you
can define the other 17 fashions in those terms.

How can we hook up circuit elements in parallel?  We need to save the
beginning of the parallel section on the stack with `[`, save the end
of the first branch with `|` and return to the beginning, and then
connect the two ends with `]` when we reach them.  (Note that this
implies that parallelism is of strictly two branches.)  This suggests
that `[` is just DUP and `|` is just SWAP, while `]` is a
graph-construction operation that shorts two nodes together and then
drops one of them.

In this interpretation, then, non-series-parallel circuits are merely
circuits that don’t respect the stack discipline on node access; they
could be defined like Forth constants or PostScript variables, and
whenever invoked, they short the node on top of the stack to their
node (and leave it on the stack).  Perhaps rather than `80 CONSTANT
WIDTH` we should write something like `80 ]: WIDTH`, since if we’re
defining a node, we probably started by duplicating a node with `[`,
and it’s nice if the parens line up.

So then what does this previous circuit look like?

    q1@ [I ac | C] q2@; [D' q1@ D' | D' q2@ D' | C] S [D' | L [ C | [V'|R] R]]

It becomes the following:

    [ D' [ [ ac I | C ] ]: q | [ D' q D' | C ] ] S [ D' | L [ C | [ V' | R] R ] ]

However, in this version, we have a way to handle the special case of
the implicit circuit around everything: an extra [ at the beginning
saves the starting point, and an extra ] at the end unifies them.  So
this becomes:

    [ [ D' [ [ ac I | C ] ]: q D' | [ D' q D' | C ] ] S [ D' | L [ C | [ V' | R] R ] ] ]

Or, if we use a more sophisticated tokenizer than Forth’s:

    [[D' [[ac I|C]]: q D' | [D' q D' | C]] S [D' | L [C | [V' | R] R]]]

Or, if we use more fashionable punctuation, maybe

    {{~d {{ac i, c}}=q ~d, {~d q ~d, c}} s {~d, l {c, {~v, r} r}}}

I’m not sure if this is an improvement in readability over the
previous expression, but the semantics are a lot less muddy!  It lacks
the feature the other version had, though, where reversing the
direction of a circuit element was a general-purpose feature.

This version is strongly reminiscent of Binate, though, with its
concatenation-for-series-and-comma-for-parallel, and I think it’s
probably possible to take the analogy further to the possible benefit
of one or the other language.  In particular, Binate’s approach to
“named terminals” is more readable, and Binate does handle converse
orthogonally, but this thing's approach to “named labels” is cleaner.