So I’ve come to the conclusion that the most significant thing to
focus on right now is getting clanking replicators up and running:
programmable machines based on bulk-material-processing technology
(i.e. the way all machines except for a few experimental STM and AFM
setups in research labs operate) that can reproduce themselves much
faster than the economic growth rate, say in hours to weeks rather
than decades.

I think this is possible now, there’s a sort of “arms race” underway
to get it to happen, and whoever succeeds will have a massive economic
advantage, comparable to but larger than the discontinuity in the
shift from hunter-gatherer and pastoral-nomad lifestyles to
agriculture.

Freitas is the one who’s written the most about this in the past.
[Sipper also has a page on the
issue](https://www.cs.bgu.ac.il/~sipper/selfrep/).

I’ve just downloaded Freitas and Merkle’s 2004 book KSRM, which seems
to be the latest survey of the space; it probably inspired Adrian
Bowyer to start RepRap.  Freitas in particular seems focused on
molecular nanotechnology now, but it seems likely that MNT is
somedistance further down the road.

The race is unremarked and can be carried out at small scale and
without exotic materials or, probably, much special resources.  Once a
clanking replicator is created, exponential growth should be rapid.

Many words are available from fiction and more careful speculation for
such a project: Autofacs, Second Variety, Screamers, Berserkers,
Auxons, and Replicators.
[Auxon](http://discovermagazine.com/1995/oct/robotbuildthysel569) is a
positive term (from [Lackner and Wendt’s 1995
proposal](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0895717795000719)),
and
[Autofac](https://archive.org/stream/galaxymagazine-1955-11/Galaxy_1955_11#page/n71/mode/2up)
is sort of neutral; the others are all nightmares.

I have a lot of reading to do now.

Mechanical vs. electronic computation
-------------------------------------

I think mechanical control systems might be adequate, and they won’t
require the exotic high-purity materials that semiconductor devices
do.  Freitas I guess didn’t think that was going to be a problem in
1980.

However, this requires a mechanical system capable of universal
computation.  [Reif wrote a survey chapter in 2008 on mechanical
computation](http://csis.pace.edu/~marchese/CS396x/Computing/MechComp.pdf
"Mechanical computation: its Computational Complexity...")  which
seems to suggest that nobody has built a mechanical universal computer
yet.

The [Curta I
calculator](http://wvegter.hivemind.net/abacus/CyberHeroes/Herzstark.htm)
had only 571 parts, while Vaucanson’s swan (according to Freitas) had
over 1000.  I think Calculus Vaporis could probably be implemented
with a similar parts count using lookup tables for combinational
logic.
