The structure-from-shading problem is the problem of knowing the shape
of a 3-D object from seeing how light falls on it; it suffers from a
number of difficulties such as having to assume that the object is all
the same color and not being able to tell when a Lambertian surface
rotates around the vector of the [dominant] light beam.

But if the object is covered in or made of woven or nonwoven cloth, as
the humans often are, and you have a high-enough-resolution image to
see the individual threads of the cloth (or meltpoints, in the case of
nonwovens like *friselina*), you have several great advantages.

First, the threads or meltpoints give you a dependable, repeating
three-dimensional microtexture, which gives you a sample of
illumination of different surface normals in the neighborhood of the
overall surface normal.

Second, thread or meltpoint-line direction discontinuities often
indicate surface discontinuities.  (Sometimes theyâ€™re just seams,
though.)

Third, the threads or lines of meltpoints are typically at right
angles, and this gives you an independent clue about how inclined each
surface patch is to the camera.

Fourth, the threads or meltpoints are typically evenly spaced over the
entire surface, and this allows estimation of relative Z-coordinates
by perspective.

Fifth, although fabric is somewhat flexible, the threads or meltpoints
generally run near ecliptics over the surface if the fabric is to not
wrinkle.  Nonwoven fabric is much less flexible.

Some fabrics, such as plaids, stripeds, houndstooths, and certain
prints, are amenable to algorithms based on some of these properties
even if the image resolution is not good enough to see individual
threads.