One of the difficulties with the Lisp memory model used by most
mainstream programming languages today is that memory usage is fairly
unpredictable, and allocation is fairly ubiquitous.  This means that
writing code that cannot fail is pretty difficult.

The nested-objects memory model used by COBOL and used with some
modification by C avoids this problem, but it’s much less flexible.
Every object has a fixed size, so you’re always running off the ends
of buffers, which is another way for your code to fail.

The Z-machine memory model used by Zork is an interesting alternative.
Z-machine objects are normally all allocated at compile time, but
linked together into a linked-list nested container hierarchy
reminiscent of the DOM at runtime, and each object has a sort of
property list which you can mutate but not add to or remove from.  In
games like Zork the container hierarchy is used for possession and
location: your book might be contained in your bag, which is contained
in you, who is contained in the entry hall, which is contained by the
universe and which also contains a handkerchief and two exits.

In the Z-machine, objects are never created or deleted, but merely
move from one container to another.  Moreover, inserting the object
into its new container is a constant-time operation involving the
setting of three pointers.  Because none of those three pointers is
“prev”, removing an object from its current container is a
variable-time operation.  Here’s a graphviz diagram:

    digraph zorkish {
        node [shape=record, label="{\N|{<parent>parent|<child>child|<sibling>sibling}}"];
        universe:child       -> hall        ; hall:parent                  -> universe;
        hall:child           -> player      ; player:parent                -> hall    ;
        player:child         -> bag         ; bag:parent                   -> player  ;
        bag:child            -> book        ; book:parent                  -> bag     ;
        player:sibling       -> handkerchief; handkerchief:parent          -> hall    ;
        handkerchief:sibling -> exit1       ; exit1:parent                 -> hall    ;
        exit1:sibling        -> exit2       ; exit2:parent                 -> hall    ;
    }

You could imagine generic functions that work over such a structure.
For example, you could write a filter function that cleaned any
contents out of a container that didn’t pass a given criterion, moving
them into a given wastebasket, or a sort function.

We could modify the structure somewhat.  We could use these nodes to
represent relationships between entities rather than entities in
themselves — originally we had only a “contains” relationship, but we
could include relationships such as “has as title”, “has as acronym”,
etc.  This gets us quite close to the Python or Lua or JS data model,
but if we adopt that data model directly, we have the problem that it
doesn’t allow duplicate properties in a dict.

Consider this example JSON:

    {
      "glossary": {
        "title": "example glossary",
        "GlossDiv": {
          "title": "S",
          "GlossList": {
            "GlossEntry": {
              "ID": "SGML",
              "SortAs": "SGML",
              "GlossTerm": "Standard Generalized Markup Language",
              "Acronym": "SGML",
              "Abbrev": "ISO 8879:1986",
              "GlossDef": {
                "para": "A meta-markup language, used to create markup languages such as DocBook.",
                "GlossSeeAlso": [
                  "GML",
                  "XML"
                ]
              },
              "GlossSee": "markup"
            }
          }
        }
      }
    }

It contains a list, GlossSeeAlso.  Suppose we represent that with
multiple values for the property GlossSeeAlso of the GlossDev entity,
by which I mean the object that is the GlossDev property of the other
entity:

    { ...
      "Acronym": "SGML",
      "GlossDev": {
        "para": "A meta-markup language, used to create markup languages such as DocBook.",
        "GlossSeeAlso": "GML",
        "GlossSeeAlso": "XML"
      }
    }

This change to the data model eliminates the need for separate lists.
In effect, all property values are implicitly lists.

That fragment might look like this:

    digraph arcs {
        node [shape=Mbox; label="\"\N\""];
        GML XML SGML paraval;
        paraval [label="\"A meta-markup language, used to create markup languages such as DocBook.\""];
        {
            node [shape=record, label="{type \N|{<kid>kid|<sib>sib}}"];
            "root":kid       -> Acronym;
            Acronym:kid      -> SGML   ; Acronym:sib      -> GlossDev     ;
            GlossDev:kid     -> para   ;
            para:kid         -> paraval; para:sib         -> GlossSeeAlso ;
            GlossSeeAlso:kid -> GML    ; GlossSeeAlso:sib -> GlossSeeAlso2;
            GlossSeeAlso2 [label="{type GlossSeeAlso|{<kid>kid|<sib>sib}}"];
            GlossSeeAlso2:kid -> XML;
        }
    }

This change to the data model means that removing an arc from an
entity (and not deleting it) or adding an existing arc to an entity
can no longer fail.  Furthermore, fetching a property from an entity
cannot fail either; it can only return an empty list.

In a 16-bit world, these nodes probably take up 6 bytes each.  If we
expand the “kid” pointer to be a hash table of 4 or 8 entries, we lose
the sequencing among different properties, but we can still retain
sequencing within a single property.  We use more memory, though still
much less than Python, but property lookup becomes instantaneous on
small objects.
