Copper plating is an effective technique for preventing microbial
contamination of surfaces; it can also prevent corrosion and contact
dermatitis from other metals.  US pennies are zinc electroplated with 20
microns of copper; this is sufficient to prevent them from wearing
visibly even over the course of decades.  The Royal Mint claims that
their 25-micron coating is sufficient to give circulating currency a
life of 25 to 30 years.

How much would it cost to buy enough copper to copper-plate furniture,
plates, doorknobs, silverware, walls, etc.?  Let’s suppose that 10
microns is adequate, since we can replate when it wears through after
a few years, so each m² of surface is 10 μ(m³) = 10 mℓ.  Copper’s
density is 8.96g/mℓ, so that’s 0.0896kg/m².  At the moment, the price
of NYMEX HG contracts — in some sense the wholesale price of
copper — is US$2.26 to US$2.30 per pound.  That works out to about
US$5 per kg, which works out to a copper cost of about US$0.45/m² for
this 10-micron plating.

So copper-plating your entire house is going to be dominated by the
cost of the plating process, not of the copper itself.  The copper
itself is a quite affordable cost.

The 2001 edition of the ASM Specialty Handbook _Copper and Copper
Alloys_ says, on p.133, Figure 4, in the “Copper and Copper Alloy
Coatings” chapter, that it is practical to achieve copper deposit
thickness of 3 to 3.5 μm per minute with 8–10 amperes per square
decimeter with periodic current reversal, at I think 6 volts; as its
source it cites “_Electroplating Engineering Handbook_, Reinhold,
1971, p. 748, 750”.  This would provide the desired 10μm thickness in
about three minutes at a cost of, say, 9 A/dm² · 100 dm²/m² ·
3 minutes · 6 V = 972 kJ/m² ≈ 1MJ/m².  That’s about US$0.027/m² for
the energy at a retail cost of US$0.10/kWh, which is measurable, but
more than an order of magnitude lower than the cost of the copper
itself.