A soldering gun is typically 150 watts; a woodburning kit, like for
writing your name on your baseball bat, is 25 watts.  Compound
parabolic concentrators, if pointed correctly at the sun, can
theoretically achieve 11000 suns of concentration without refraction
(1/sin²(0.54°)), and the solar constant is about 1kW/m².  At 11MW/m²,
150 watts is 14 mm² and 25 watts is 2.3 mm², and a piece of dark metal
placed at that point could conduct the heat to a smaller point if
there’s a heatsink there.

Suppose we want a CPC with a 2.3mm² absorber area.  That’s a
1.5-millimeter square.  What does it look like?

We could make it square rather than round, which should make it easier
to fabricate.  Its eventual opening would be 25W of 1kW/m², which is a
square 15.8 centimeters on a side, but it’s quite long indeed: to
achieve its theoretical ideal performance, that 15.8 centimeters
actually subtends 0.54° as seen from the absorber, which is to say
it’s 16.8 meters long.

However, most of that length reflects very little light.  If we’re
willing to accept the reflected image of the sun only filling up, say,
the outer 45 degrees of our viewing angle, which should reduce the
power received only by a factor of 2 or so, then we should be able to
truncate the CPC at a much more reasonable height.

...but how do I calculate that height?  I mean I guess I could plot
points and solve it numerically...

...maybe actually a CHC or something similar would be a better way to
achieve such a large concentration?

What about imaging optics, like a magnifying glass?  Can you solder
with a magnifying glass?  A magnifying glass of 15.8 centimeters
square probably can’t focus light any closer than about 15.8
centimeters focal length (aperture f/1).  At that distance 0.54° gives
you a 1.49-millimeter-wide image of the sun, covering 2.2 square
millimeters.  So yeah, a short-focal-length magnifying glass would
work for that.  Typical focal lengths are longer, but they wouldn’t
have to be.

