At this point I’ve imported 90 notes into Dercuano, and the lack of
images of any kind is sort of annoying.  My actual, paper notebooks
have a little line-drawing “icon” for each note, maybe 10 millimeters
square, but often some kind of graphic would help a lot both with
visual appeal and with comprehensibility.  But my total byte budget of
some 5MB makes this challenging.

This is related to `dercuano-calculation` and
`dercuano-formula-display`.

Example uses
------------

To take a few of the notes I currently have in Dercuano at random:

File `deep-freeze` could benefit from diagrams of one or more of the
following: 11 tonnes of foods including soybeans; a cutaway freezer
with labels for insulation, refrigeration, and passive thermal
storage; freezers of different sizes, with different amounts of
surface area per unit volume, including a cubic-meter sphere and a
thousand-cubic-meter sphere; food stored at the bottom of a 30-meter
well; mounds of sand and locally excavated earth; a heat–temperature
curve for water, including enthalpy of fusion and vaporization; plots
of heat loss versus surface area and insulation thickness; etc.  It
would also benefit, I think, from a goofy line drawing of a freezer
with a smiley face on it.  A three-dimensional rotating rendering of a
freezer would maybe be a plus, too; and a model whose parameters you
could adjust interactively and see the relationships between the other
parameters in the neighborhood would be awesome.

File `dehydrating-processes` could benefit from sketches of user
interfaces; from diagrams of the interaction sequences and data flows
being discussed, of FlatBuffers or binary array state, and of the
timing of sequences; and from illustrations of punched cards and
perhaps a dehydrated window or something.

File `executable-scholarship` could benefit from a timeline, at least.

File `flux-deposition` could benefit from an illustration/diagram of
the binder/powder-bed/tray setup, and maybe of some grains being
fluxed — generally mechanical things like this really need diagrams;
maybe also a temperature scale showing where different mixes sinter
and/or melt would be helpful.

File `imgui-programming-language` would benefit a lot from some
sketches of the UI components being programmed, and maybe also some
diagrams of activation records allocated on the stack and of
Golang-style interfaces.

File `transactional-event-handlers` would benefit from some timing
diagrams showing priority problems, concurrent transactions,
transaction conflicts with pessimistic and optimistic synchronization,
and deadlock.

Possible tools
--------------

### No photos ###

A thing I’ve done in the past is to draw diagrams on paper and
photograph them.  This allows for pleasingly direct feedback during
the drawing process, but even with aggressive compression, the
resulting image files are dozens of kilobytes each.

### No bloated SVGs ###

It’s important that whatever I choose be compact, because Dercuano
needs to remain easily downloadable in full.

The Web standard format for line drawings is SVG — even hand computers
running iOS support it now.  SVG is super cool; it supports
alpha-blending, Bézier curves, gradients, arbitrary affine transforms,
and text.  You can do a lot in very few bytes of SVG, and it’s a lot
more readable and debuggable than PostScript, my pre-SVG favorite.
The standard example is probably something like this 78-byte triangle,
which is perhaps an especially good example because it renders
incorrectly in old versions of Firefox:
<svg width="30" height="40">
<path d="M 10,10 L 20,20 10,30" fill="red"/>
</svg>

    <svg width="30" height="40"><path d="M 10,10 L 20,20 10,30"
        fill="red"/></svg>

#### An example diagram in handwritten SVG ####

And I *have* used SVG for diagrams, for example in file
`mechano-optical-vector-display`:

<div><svg width="128" height="128"><!-- This is a diagram. -->
<use xlink:href="#burst" transform="translate(128 60.24)" />
<path class="beam" d="M128,60.24 L60,60.24 l-121.1,-992.5" />
<path class="mirror" d="M90.51,128 A90.51,90.51 0 0,0 0,37.49 v90.51" />
<path class="arrow" d="M20,57.49 a70.51,70.51 0 0 1 50.51,50.51" />
</svg>
<!-- SVG for definitions of common things used in embedded SVGs. -->
<svg><defs>
<marker id="v" overflow="visible" orient="auto">
  <path d="M-8,-4 0,0 -8,4" />
</marker>
<marker id="vv" overflow="visible" orient="auto">
  <path d="M-8,-4 0,0 -8,4 M4,-5 12,0 4,5" />
</marker>
<symbol id="burst" overflow="visible">
<path d="M0,0 l-16,-16 16,16  -16,16 16,-16  -16,-8 16,8
         -16,8 16,-8  -8,-16 8,16  -8,16 8,-16" class="beam" />
</symbol>
</defs></svg>
<style>
path { stroke: black; stroke-width: .5px; fill: none }
.beam { stroke: red }
.mirror { stroke-width: 0; fill: #ccc }
.arrow { marker-end: url(#v); marker-start: url(#vv) }
</style>
</div>

The source code for that looks like this, which is somewhat verbose
but arguably not unreasonably so.

    <div><svg width="128" height="128"><!-- This is a diagram. -->
    <use xlink:href="#burst" transform="translate(128 60.24)" />
    <path class="beam" d="M128,60.24 L60,60.24 l-121.1,-992.5" />
    <path class="mirror" d="M90.51,128 A90.51,90.51 0 0,0 0,37.49 v90.51" />
    <path class="arrow" d="M20,57.49 a70.51,70.51 0 0 1 50.51,50.51" />
    </svg>
    <!-- SVG for definitions of common things used in embedded SVGs. -->
    <svg><defs>
    <marker id="v" overflow="visible" orient="auto">
      <path d="M-8,-4 0,0 -8,4" />
    </marker>
    <marker id="vv" overflow="visible" orient="auto">
      <path d="M-8,-4 0,0 -8,4 M4,-5 12,0 4,5" />
    </marker>
    <symbol id="burst" overflow="visible">
    <path d="M0,0 l-16,-16 16,16  -16,16 16,-16  -16,-8 16,8
             -16,8 16,-8  -8,-16 8,16  -8,16 8,-16" class="beam" />
    </symbol>
    </defs></svg>
    <style>
    path { stroke: black; stroke-width: .5px; fill: none }
    .beam { stroke: red }
    .mirror { stroke-width: 0; fill: #ccc }
    .arrow { marker-end: url(#v); marker-start: url(#vv) }
    </style>
    </div>

However, you can probably kind of tell from reading that that it was
pretty slow to write, and from looking at it that the workflow doesn’t
really support rapid iteration to get it to look good.

#### WYSIWYG SVG editors produce insanely bloated output ####

On the other hand, the standard tools for generating SVGs produce data
that looks more like this:

    <path d="M 21.789062 16.140625 L 20.332031 15.941406
             L 20.335938 15.742188 L 20.371094 15.53125
             L 20.453125…

That’s eight significant figures on every coordinate, absolute
coordinates everywhere instead of relative, and using diagonal lines
instead of H horizontal or V vertical lines even when the relevant
coordinate difference is in the fifth significant figure, and also
using unnecessary spaces.  The extra significant figures are
essentially random, so gzip isn’t going to be able to compress them,
except by noting that, being digits, they only need four bits each.

The problem with this kind of thing is that, even when it’s
hand-drawn, it mixes the actual desired signal with a lot of random
noise which is hopefully imperceptible but still incompressible.  The
mouse produces, say, 100 positions per second, each with three
significant figures in each of X and Y, though the number is smaller
with relative positions.  Crudely, that’s 6400 bits of data per
second, 800 bytes per second, after compression, that can be added to
the Dercuano download package.

I launched Inkscape, plugged in a mouse, and drew with the pencil tool
for a while.  Running Inkscape for 110 seconds, I produced a
54-kilobyte SVG that compresses to 15.6 kilobytes; most of it looks
like this (line breaks added for clarity):

    <path
       style="fill:none;fill-rule:evenodd;stroke:#000000;
              stroke-width:1px;stroke-linecap:butt;
              stroke-linejoin:miter;stroke-opacity:1"
       d="m 94.285714,946.64792 c 7.539686,-3.23129 21.663356,-10.54083
            31.428576,-11.42857 15.99002,-1.45364 19.9212,2.36631
            34.28571,-2.85715 6.00412,-2.18331 11.32674,-5.92773…

That is, Inkscape has converted my three-significant-figure mouse
coordinates into coordinates with seven to nine significant figures.
Just in case.  How helpful.

#### Why this is too much bloat for Dercuano to tolerate ####

The trouble with this is that 15.6 compressed kilobytes per 110
seconds is 1.1 kilobit per second, and the entire five-megabyte target
size for Dercuano — containing many years of notes — would be
completely filled with SVG in less than ten hours of drawing time.
I’ve already spent over 20 hours just getting the first 600 kilobytes
of Dercuano to work so far.

The basic reason many years of notes fit into five megabytes is that I
can only type about 90 words per minute, which is 72 bits per second
uncompressed, 24 bits per second compressed — a bit rate 45 times
lower.  And then I spend time revising the notes, which often makes
them better without making them larger, though as anyone can see, I
don’t revise my notes nearly enough.

### TikZ won’t fit ###

One of the SVGs I excerpted above is a sort of graphic of a
comic-book-style explosion or impact, but with a gradient.  I
generated it with the TikZ graphics system for T<sub>E</sub>X from the
following input:

    \documentclass{standalone}
    \usepackage{tikz}
    \begin{document}
    \tikz\shade[inner color=yellow,outer color=red](1ex,0)
        \foreach\t in{4, 8, ..., 360}
            {-- (\t:{.1+Mod((\t/17)^3, 57)/100})};
    \end{document}

This uses (θ ÷ 17)³ % 57 (composed with an affine function) to
generate a “random” radius for each of 90 different angles to generate
a jagged outer polygon, then fills it with a gradient.  This is not
something you can do in SVG, although you can do it in something else
(like TikZ or JS) and generate SVG programmatically.  And TikZ comes
with a massive built-in library of things like arrowheads, directed
graph layout algorithms, tree layout, plotting math functions,
calendars, finite state machines, ERDs, Petri Nets, and so on.  The
sections of the TikZ manual about arrowheads (and arrow tails, etc.)
total about 10 pages.  It’s a bit overwhelming, honestly.

Unfortunately, I can’t use TikZ directly in Dercuano, because that
would involve embedding not only the 5 megabytes of TikZ, but also the
rest of T<sub>E</sub>X and L<sup>A</sup>T<sub>E</sub>X that it depends
on to run, in some kind of browser-executable form, probably compiled
with Emscripten.  And, while that’s probably a feasible thing to do,
I’m pretty sure would blow my space budget for Dercuano.

I could draw (“write”?) graphics in TikZ and generate SVGs from them,
but that just puts us back at square one: the SVGs are bloated, and
I’d blow my space budget even faster that way.

TikZ has another problem, too: it’s purely intended for static
graphics.  But in Dercuano much of the time a dynamic,
interactively-responsive graphic would be better, and only marginally
harder to write.

### d3 may be a good option ###

d3.js is a JS library for dynamic data-driven graphics which generates
SVG at runtime using the DOM.  One of the minified copies of d3.js I
have here is 151 kilobytes, and it gzips to 53 kilobytes.  Another,
non-minified copy I have is d3 v3, and it’s 315kB, gzipping to 68kB.
It’s pretty easy to use, and in particular it’s pretty easy to get
really nice graphical output from, and it’s amazing at interactivity.
On the downside, the JS code to use it is usually pretty verbose, and
it’s not well suited for the kinds of sketching and illustration I
earlier said were most important, although it’s probably fine for
timelines.

### Some kind of restricted-bandwidth WYSIWYG drawing program ###

For some things, though, the closer to paper, the better.  I just
don’t want to pay half a megabyte per hour for the privilege of
faithfully recording the shaking of my hands as I sketch; shaky lines
can be good but we might as well produce the shakiness from a
highly-compressible random number generator.  One possibility here
would be drawing with a line that thrashes around near the mouse,
starting at low-entropy points in whatever encoding I end up with, and
gradually moving to higher-entropy points.  Or maybe you stroke the
mouse along a line multiple times to coax it into the shape you want.
Maybe snap to a grid that gets finer if you zoom in: then you’d need
to zoom in.  Or maybe you need to click to nail down a spline point,
and there’s a snap grid that is finer for smaller displacements.

Another possibility would be something that encourages drawings to be
highly factored, perhaps by having clumsy graphical primitives (though
primitives that compose flexibly, e.g., adopting the line width and
color from their use context) and really low reuse overhead.

A third possibility, and this is kind of cheating in a way, is just to
use a textual language to describe the graphics, but shorten the
feedback cycle as much as possible so that you can vary things
interactively to see the results on the screen.  To the extent that
you can map backwards from the screen image to the textual source
code, you may be able to alter the textual source code by direct
manipulation of the screen image.

Ivan Sutherland’s SKETCHPAD was a visual programming language for
interactively constructing a set of graphical objects and constraints
for them to fulfill, progressively approaching fulfillment, and
visualizing the results.

The problem with these approaches is that in some sense you’re
deliberately impeding the drawing process, which you would think would
make it clumsier.  But maybe that clumsiness can be minimized or even
reversed — the bandwidth from my brain to the mouse is definitely not
1100 bits per second and may not even be the 24 bits per second I get
on the keyboard.  If the drawing program can somehow filter out the
other 1000+ bits per second of pure noise, it might actually make it
*easier* to draw things rather than harder.
