Desbarrerarme: a UI for speaking to people
==========================================

Facebook chat is dangerously addictive in part because it is so easy
to use, and constantly offers you new opportunities for what to do.
However, aside from the political problems with using it, it’s
somewhat repulsive in that its HTML UI often hangs for long periods of
time and makes your machine slow.

But it has a number of good points, which I want to incorporate into a
UI of my own for talking on chat:

1. Saying “OK” in your current conversation is three keystrokes: O, K,
   and Enter.  No need to choose a subject line, no need to invoke a
   “new message” command.

2. Nevertheless, you can send arbitrarily long messages, with
   formatting.  FB has removed the boldface from asterisks it used to
   support, and it tends to mangle complex formatting, but it’s still
   perfectly usable for multiple paragraphs filled to your screen
   width.

3. You can move among recent conversations with single keystrokes, ↑
   and ↓, to be specific.

4. It suggests that you interact with people you haven’t interacted
   with in a while, to a limited extent, by using their presence
   information.

5. Regardless of which device you’re interacting from, you always see
   the same message history.  Opening a chat shows you your previous
   conversations with the person.

6. It supports links and embedded images.

So my plan is to rig up something similar, but for email.  As with
Gmail, you’ll see the emails in a thread above your text box at the
bottom, with repeated crap elided.  By default, you’ll have only a
single thread with a given person, and you’ll always be replying to
their latest message, if any.  If they change the subject line, it
will be a new thread.  You should be able to answer ten emails from
ten different people with one-word answers in ten seconds, even if you
don’t have an internet connection.

Each thread has a simple read/not-read flag.  When you open it, it
gets marked as “read”.  When you receive a new message in it, it gets
marked as “not-read”.

Furthermore, I want to use this for chat systems other than mail,
including everything Pidgin supports.

To allow scaling to a larger number of historical threads, and more
important threads, than Facebook, I want to do some amount of
search-based navigation — to let you see just the results of a
search. XXX

I want to use this to try out a theoretical design for distributed
user interfaces I called “rumor-oriented programming”.  Every time you
receive a message, mark a message to be sent, successfully send a
message, start writing a draft, or update a draft, that information is
recorded as a “rumor” in the “rumorset” of your Desbarrerarme
installation.  When you synchronize your Desbarrerarme installations,
which will happen constantly while you’re online, they spread all the
new rumors to each other.

The user interface is rendered from a query on the current rumorset
state, a query which is not sensitive to the order in which the rumors
arrived at the current node.  Therefore, once two Desbarrerarme nodes
have finished synchronizing, their user interfaces are guaranteed to
render the same information.

However, there is a little bit of information, like which thread
you’re currently looking at and where your cursor is in the draft,
that should not be replicated.  This is “control state”, and not
replicating it is crucial to preserving usability in the face of
multiple clients being used by, potentially, multiple people.

To keep things simple, I want to write the user interface view as a
pure function of the rumorset state and control state.  But, to keep
things efficient, I want to cache and reuse the results of previous
computations.  This is much more important for the rumorset part of
the question, which could contain gigabytes of information, than for
the user interface, which might be a megabyte or, in the form of
drawing operations, a couple of kilobytes.

I also want to avoid complete recomputations of large results.  For
example, the leftmost column of the screen layout should contain the 