Is it energetically feasible to run a diesel engine on diesel fuel
combusted with oxygen derived from electrolysis of water, driven from
the engine itself?  Although there's no fundamental thermodynamic
reason such a thing is impossible, presumably it isn't, or military
diesel submarines would do it.

NEL Hydrogen claims their commercially available electrolysis
apparatus electrolyzes hydrogen gas from seawater at 49 kWh/m³ at STP;
this presumably means it also produces
[oxygen](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oxygen) from water at about 98
kWh/m³, which at 1.429 g/ℓ is about 68.6 kWh/kg.  This is 247 MJ/kg,
which is about 6× the specific energy from burning common fuels such
as diesel fuel (43 MJ/kg) with oxygen.

It gets worse, though, because burning those fuels requires a much
larger amount of oxygen than the fuel: a CH<sub>2</sub> unit, weighing
14 daltons, becomes a CO<sub>2</sub> molecule and an H<sub>2</sub>O
molecule, using 48 daltons of oxygen.  So actually burning diesel fuel
gives you 43 MJ per kg of diesel, but only 43 × 14 ÷ 48 = 12.5 MJ per
kg of oxygen.  So you only get back about 5% of the electrolysis
energy when you use the oxygen.  That's really, really far from being
viable.

So you can't run a diesel engine on water and diesel fuel.

There *are* things that have such a strong affinity for oxygen that
you can burn them with oxygen from water for a net energy gain; sodium
is probably the best-known example.  As far as I know, all of them
pose serious practical problems for use in a heat engine.
