Emacs stores the text in a buffer in a buffer-gap representation: the
text before the cursor is in one contiguous block, the text after it
is in another contiguous block, and there is a slack space in between.
This makes inserting or deleting text at the cursor very fast, while
moving the cursor is somewhat slower, involving copying the text that
the cursor moves past to the other side of the buffer gap.  This is
not a very fashionable way of doing things nowadays, since it involves
a lot of mutation in the course of what you’d think would be read-only
operations, but in practice it works very well indeed.

I was thinking that a possibly interesting representation for mutable
*sorted* sequences is a somewhat analogous thing, one which maintains
two *heaps* for the elements before and after a “cursor”.  To move the
cursor forward, you pop an item off the after-heap, which is a
min-heap, and insert it into the before-heap, which is a max-heap.  To
move the cursor backward, you pop an item off the before-heap and
insert it into the after-heap.  You can insert and delete items from
these two heaps as well.  All four of these operations — forward,
back, insert arbitrary, and delete arbitrary — have logarithmic
worst-case and average-case time.  Initially building the heaps from
an unsorted set of items (with a given key as the cursor position)
takes linear time.  No external space is needed.

The more normal way to support these operations would be using a
B-tree.  Is that better?  It gives you logarithmic insertion and
deletion time, yes, but it takes N log N time to build the B-tree in
the first place, and it takes potentially substantial space to build.
It also gives you some goodies that the double-heap does not:
logarithmic-time access to find a given key and constant-time
iteration.