I was pondering a design for gap buffers in C, trying to figure out
the interface.  At first I thought two access functions would be
enough, one to read a range and one to write a range, in both cases to
a raw char pointer.  (Plus a function to get its length.)

Then I realized that meant that reading from or writing to a file
would require an extra inefficient copy through an intermediate
buffer.  So I thought I’d want to add functions that take file
descriptors, too, because that’s a pretty important thing to do with
strings, really the only thing other than copying them around in
memory if you’re on Unix.

But then I realized that I’d probably want to copy data from one gap
buffer to another at some point, but for that I’d still need the extra
inefficient copy.  So I was thinking of adding another function, and
then I realized what I was doing.

All that’s needed here is a generic interface for piping byte streams
around, which could be either push (a byte-sink interface) or pull (a
byte-source interface).  Then we just need pipe and antipipe façades
for gap buffers, files, and raw char pointers.

C isn’t that great for generic interfaces, but you could do it this
way:

    typedef struct {
        int (*write)(void *user_data, const char *s, size_t len);
        void *user_data;
    } byte_sink;

Given a `byte_sink`, you can invoke it several times with different
pieces of data.  A gap buffer asked to write its contents to a
`byte_sink` might invoke it twice, once for the part of the text
before the gap and once for the part after it.

(In other contexts, a byte-sink interface might also include a close
method, an error method, and so forth.  In this case, the `write`
function has a return value that I intend to use to indicate errors.)

Here `user_data` is used to distinguish different objects of the same
type, since C function pointers aren’t closures.  I originally heard
the term in the context of Tcl, but by now Lua, OpenGLUT, GLFW, GTK+
and GLib, Core Audio, systemd, and Box2D also use the term to mean
more or less the same thing.

Then, to write to gap buffers, file descriptors, or raw byte buffers
requires three different `byte_sink` write functions, and functions
that return `byte_sink` wrappers for them; to read from gap buffers,
file descriptors, or raw byte buffers, we need three different
functions that take `byte_sink` arguments.

So instead of five functions, now we have nine functions.  But now, in
addition to being able to copy data into and out of gap buffers, we
can also copy data from one file descriptor to another; and if we add
a new string buffer type in the future (like an array of gap buffers)
we can copy data to and from it in the same way.

This is still kind of crappy for reading data from files, because it
still involves an extra buffer copy — the file descriptor byte source
function is obligated to allocate it.
