We are witnessing the birth of a new phenomenon I haven’t seen named
before.  I propose to call it “algorithmic scholarly communication”.

[Alan Kay describes] the birth of a new genre of media as proceeding
in a series of stages:

> A new genre is established.  A few years later a significant
> improvement is made.  After a few more years the improvement is
> perceived as not just a “better old thing” but an “almost new thing”
> that leads directly to the next stable genre.

[Alan Kay describes]: http://worrydream.com/refs/Kay%20-%20Computer%20Software%20-%20SciAm.pdf

This essay identifies an “almost new thing” which is beginning to
transform the nature of scholarly communication.  First I provide some
background, including my personal view of the principles underlying
scholarly communication; then, I give some thought-provoking examples
of the current state of the system; and then, I project where it seems
likely to take us.

Background: what are scholars, and what is scholarly communication?
-------------------------------------------------------------------

A hundred and thirty generations ago, we began to understand formal
mental processes when Thales and the Pythagoreans including Socrates
formulated proofs in geometry in terms of logical arguments.  Over the
next ten generations, Mozi, the Pythagoreans, and Aristotle developed
the study of logic as an object in itself.

The academy as we know it is, in name, an homage to the estate of
Plato, Socrates’ student; in structure it descends from medieval
seminaries of the Roman Catholic Church, and indeed some of those
seminaries are universities today.  It has always aimed at acquiring
and diffusing knowledge, both in the sense of practical skill (the
arts) and knowledge of what is objectively true (the sciences), though
modern epistemology has demoted Christian theology and holy writ in
general to the status of myth and metaphor rather than an
objectively-true cosmology, tempting us to scoff at the debates of the
European medieval Scholastics; it’s easy for us to forget that angels
and demons seemed as real to them as states, money, and corporations
do to us.

XXX etymology of "university"?



After 2600 years of work, we at last
succeeded in fully formalizing logical reasoning and other formal
mental processes during the 20th century; the product of this
formalization was the digital computer, which executes processes
called “algorithms”.

What happened to mathematical tables?
-------------------------------------

We have already seen executable scholarship happen in many aspects of
practical mathematics.  I have on my bookshelf a 1965 book by
R.S. Burington entitled _Handbook of Mathematical Tables and
Formulas_, first published 1933, LCCN 63-23531.  It tells me things
like this, neatly organized into tables:

    log cos x ≈ -x²/2 - x⁴/12 - x⁶/45 - 17x⁸/2520 - ... when x² < π²/4
    roughly 53030 Americans of every 100 000 live to age 63; 1800 die that year
    the cotangent of 38.5° (i.e. the reciprocal of the tangent) ≈ 1.2572
    ∇²S is defined as ∂²S/∂x² + ∂²S/∂y² + ∂²S/∂z²
    the logarithm of the cotangent of 17°21' is 0.50526
    an endomorphism is a homomorphism of a system onto itself or part of itself
    0.15° ≈ 0°9'00"
    the definition of the cumulative discrete probability as a sum Σᵢf(xᵢ)
    formulas for the sides & angles of a triangle given 2 angles & 1 side
    ∫dx/(x√(ax + b)) = 1/√b log((√(ax+b)-√b)/(√(ax+b)+√b)) for b > 0

The first half of the book is a brief but complete summary of the most
widely useful branches of mathematics; the second half consists of
numerical tables.  The first “mathematical table” of this sort was
assembled by Aryabhata in the fifth century CE; it consisted of 24
first differences of the sine function.  Calculating and disseminating
such tables — crucial for practical manual celestial navigation,
artillery warfare, trigonometric calculation in general, and
statistics — was a major effort of mathematicians for centuries.  It
inspired Babbage’s original plan to automate computation in 1822;
computing mathematical tables was the justification for funding one of
the three World War II projects that did successfully automate
computation, the ENIAC.  The ENIAC was designed to compute
mathematical tables for artillery firing.

> The other two projects were Konrad Zuse hacking in his Berlin
> apartment (and later with government support) and the secret British
> cryptanalytic Colossus machine; arguably the Harvard Mark I ASCC,
> based on Babbage’s work, was a predecessor to the ENIAC.  The Mark I
> was also used to compute mathematical tables.

After fifteen centuries, the publication of books of mathematical
tables essentially ceased in about 1975, at which point the numerical
tables were replaced in common use by HP scientific calculators, where
they had not been replaced earlier by larger and more expensive
computers.  (Bowditch’s American Practical Navigator is one of the few
remnants that still includes mathematical tables, even in the 2002
edition, the latest as of this writing; pp.565–727 are devoted to
tables, most of which are mathematically calculated rather than
empirically measured.)

The kind of mathematical scholarship formerly devoted to publishing
mathematical tables is nowadays devoted to publishing software
instead.  Pages 325 to 344 of Burington’s handbook are devoted to a
table of n², n³, √n, √(10n), and the cube roots of n, 10n, and 100n;
given a computer that can multiply integers, the square-root columns
of this table can be replaced in practice with a single line of C
code, which implements the "Babylonian method" of computing square
roots given by Hero of Alexandria (Ἥρων ὁ Ἀλεξανδρεύς) a hundred
generations ago:

    g,h;q(n){h=n;if(n)do g=h,h=(g+n/g)/2;while(g-h+2&~3);return h-=h*h>n;}

However, this line of C code, although it works and replaces two
sevenths of those twenty pages of numbers, falls short of many of the
ideals of scholarship, as I will explore below.

units(1)
--------

Several times a week, I use GNU units(1), the GNU version of the BSD
(?) units(1) program, which is a simple desk calculator program which
contains a comprehensive database of over two thousand units of
measurement, compiled over decades by the tireless scholarship of
Adrian Mariano at Cornell.  The original uses were things like this:

    You have: 60 miles per hour
    You want: furlongs per fortnight
            * 161280
            / 6.2003968e-06

But units(1) also allows me to immediately calculate things like how
many minutes of arc the sun subtends on average:

    You have: radians (2*sunradius)/sundist
    You want: arcminute
            * 31.988013
            / 0.03126171

Or, in case I’ve forgotten, that a mole of ideal gas at STP occupies 22.7ℓ:

    You have: gasconstant 
    You want: 
            Definition: 8.314472 J / mol K = 8.314472 kg m^2 / K mol s^2
    You have: gasconstant * 1 mole * tempC(0) / 100 kPa
    You want: liters
            * 22.71098
            / 0.044031565

Or that Israel’s new Sorek reverse-osmosis desalination plant, which
is [reported to use 70 atmospheres] of pressure for the reverse-
osmosis process step, is doing 7.1kJ of mechanical work per liter,
putting a lower bound on the economic cost of the freshwater obtained:

    You have: 70 atmospheres
    You want: kilojoules per liter
            * 7.09275
            / 0.14098904

[reported to use 70 atmospheres]: http://ensia.com/features/how-a-new-source-of-water-is-helping-reduce-conflict-in-the-middle-east

And that that is US$200 per megaliter or US$240 per acre foot if the
energy used to drive it costs US$100 per megawatt hour:

    You have: 70 atmospheres * US$ 100/MWh
    You want: US$ / megaliter
            * 197.02083
            / 0.0050756054
    You have: 70 atmospheres * US$ 100/MWh
    You want: US$ / acrefoot
            * 243.02308
            / 0.0041148356

I can calculate that 10 amperes of electrical current through a round
22-gauge wire amounts to 31 amps per square millimeter; I have to be
careful here, because units’s `wiregauge` unit gives me the wire
diameter, but its `circlearea` unit wants the radius:

    You have: 10 amps / circlearea(wiregauge(22)/2)
    You want: amperes / mm^2
            * 30.718763
            / 0.032553394

If I include the resistivity of copper and the equation P = I²R in the
calculation, I can get the heat production:

    You have: (10 amps)^2 * 16.78 nanoohms * meter / circlearea(wiregauge(22)/2)
    You want: watts/meter
            * 5.1546084
            / 0.19400116

(That’s enough heat to be dangerous if used as electrical wiring, but
not enough to use as a heating element, except maybe in an electrical
blanket or something.)

That was actually my second try at that calculation; on the first try,
I accidentally calculated the voltage drop per meter instead, which
units was able to catch, but not provide a useful error message for:

    You have: 16.78 nanoohms * meter * 10 amps / circlearea(wiregauge(22)/2)
    You want: watts / meter
    conformability error
            0.51546084 kg m / A s^3
            1 kg m / s^3
    You have: 16.78 nanoohms * meter * 10 amps / circlearea(wiregauge(22)/2)
    You want: 
            Definition: 0.51546084 kg m / A s^3

It happens that kg m / A s³ is equivalent to volts per meter, but
that’s not at all obvious from looking at the result.

You can see that as the examples get more complex, more and more of
the knowledge is in my head, and less and less in the software.

Actually, I didn’t have the resistivity of copper memorized in my
head; I looked it up on Wikipedia and typed it in.  There’s a
[Wikidata entry for copper] but it doesn’t yet include electrical
resistivity as a property.  It does include its density, but in the
format “8.94±0.01 Q15639371”, which units(1) cannot parse; Q15639371
is the Wikidata name for “grams per cubic centimeter.”  There was an
entry for copper in Freebase.com too, but I don’t know if it included
electrical resistivity.

[Wikidata entry for copper]: https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q753

Wolfram Vertical Line Alpha
---------------------------

Stephen Wolfram also has a broad vision of part of what I am calling
executable scholarship.  He calls it a “computational knowledge
engine”, and being Stephen Wolfram, he plans to own it, and his
version doesn’t cite any sources.

The Wolfram version is called “Wolfram|Alpha”, but I decline to use
marketing-provided punctuation in the middle of proper nouns like
“Yahoo!” and “Re/Code”, because I don’t hate my readers enough.
Instead I will spell out the term as “Wolfram Vertical Line Alpha”
when necessary.

Wolfram Vertical Line Alpha *does* include the electrical resistivity of
copper, and given the input “resistivity of copper * (10 amps)^2 /
0.326 mm^2”, it correctly computes 5.2 watts per meter.  It also claims
that the size of 22AWG wire is 0.324 mm², which differs by about 0.5%
from the value given by units(1), and will return it given the input
“22awg”, but I haven’t found a way to get Alpha to combine these
pieces of knowledge in a single formula.

The aims of scholarship
-----------------------

What is [scholarship][2]?

[2]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scholarly_method

valid
trustworthy
well-known

reproducibility
self-correcting
interlinked
honest
objective
stable
readable
public
reveals preferred embodiment
not ignorant
creative?
documentable?
replicable?
peer-reviewable?

[Boyer 1990] proposed expanding the definition of “scholarship” to
include not only the discovery of knowledge but also teaching,
application (“the use of new knowledge in solving society's
problems”), and what he calls “integration” (“where new relationships
among disciplines are discovered”, a definition broad enough to
include any research).  Boyer was unable to publish his proposed
redefinition in a peer-reviewed venue, publishing it instead through a
phony “Carnegie Foundation” whose declared purpose is to promote the
interests of teachers, which is to say, university faculty who do not
engage in scholarship; not satisfied with this, however, he
additionally proposed to expand “scholarship” to include practitioners
of a field in general, except those who use only old knowledge.

[Boyer 1990]: E. Boyer, _Scholarship reconsidered: Priorities for the
professoriate_, published by the “Carnegie Foundation for the
Advancement of Teaching.”

Square roots
------------

The line of code I gave above to calculate the square root of an
integer falls short of the aims of scholarship for several reasons.
It's hard to read (made unnecessarily so by a )

On the computer I’m typing this on, square roots are generally
calculated by proprietary Intel hardware designs that I am not able to
see, because using specialized hardware makes it much faster, and 


tested using a function called [sqrt_test][3].

.  But the
free software I run the computer on has an option to calculate square
roots using addition, subtraction, comparison, bit shifts, and
iteration, called [_FP_SQRT_MEAT_E].

[_FP_SQRT_MEAT_E]: http://osxr.org:8080/glibc/source/soft-fp/extended.h#0244
[3]: sqrt_t
http://www.uclibc-ng.org/browser/uclibc-ng/test/math/libm-test.inc?rev=fdebbe2044653c5c84172524ed6e036d38716d88#L4446

Automatic testing
-----------------

IPython notebooks
-----------------

Algorithms published in CRAN
----------------------------

Research in emulation
---------------------

Retracted results due to spreadsheet errors
-------------------------------------------

Stellarium
----------

SPICE
-----

What comes next?
----------------

Consider my 



Intertextuality, transclusion, and plagiarism
---------------------------------------------
