Material made from expanded polystyrene beads (usually referred to as
“styrofoam”, although that’s a brand name for a slightly different
material) is very common for a number of reasons.

What if we did this with minerals?

Advantages of expanded polystyrene beads
----------------------------------------

The foamed nature of the resulting material makes it light, very stiff
for its weight, very soft for its volume, forgiving of impact (I think
much of the impact energy is actually taken up by compressing the
gas), and an excellent insulator, and being some 1–2 orders of
magnitude less dense than the source polymer, it is also 1–2 orders of
magnitude cheaper per unit volume.  It doesn’t have much tensile
strength because the beads tend to pull apart, but its compressive
strength is extreme, although it suffers from creep in both tension
and compression.

Moreover, it is much more resistant to fracture propagation than pure
polystyrene, which has an alarming tendency to shatter.  Both cell
walls and bead boundaries act as barriers to crack propagation.

One of its biggest advantages, though, is its moldability.  The beads
are made to expand inside a mold, in this way filling the mold.  (I’m
not familiar with the process but I assume it’s a matter of releasing
the pressure at a temperature where the thermoplastic beads are
plastic but not molten.)

Another interesting feature is its amenability to shaping processes.
You can cut it with a hot-wire slicer with very little energy and low
to very low side loading, producing a smooth and precise surface.  The
smoothest surfaces with this process come when the wire is touching
the foam and transmitting its heat by conduction, rather than by
radiation, but this produces some side loading and consequent surface
imprecision.  The “swarf” from this process is absorbed into the
surface of the material by virtue of densification from collapsing
cells.  It’s also fairly easy to cut with more traditional processes
like sawing and milling — much, much easier than the underlying
polymer.  These processes work at such low forces that they do not
create significant heat, and thus do not create a heat-affected zone.

Why isn’t everything made from styrofoam?  It’s very flexible for its
volume, which is an advantage in many applications but a disadvantage
where it needs to resist buckling — though it is commonly used as part
of composites (see file `sandwich-theory`, which also talks about
buckling a lot).  It isn’t transparent, it doesn’t resist high
temperatures (because polystyrene creeps and then melts), and it isn’t
hard.  The molding process isn’t very precise, typically having
surface roughness that approaches a millimeter in places, and I
suspect it’s considerably slower than injection molding.  It’s
nonporous, and in a lot of situations where softness is desirable,
porosity is too.

Finally, a lot of people just fucking hate it aesthetically, precisely
because it’s so widely used and cheap, and it got a bad rap in the
1980s when it was blown with CFCs and thus contributed to ozone
depletion.

Why minerals?
-------------

As I’ve discussed in some other notes, it’s very desirable for
self-replicating machinery to be independent of organic feedstocks,
including things like petroleum: inorganic material is much more
abundant both on Earth elsewhere, it doesn’t create conflicts with
objectives like reterraforming, and it avoids scaring the humans.
However, most materials that are strong but not too brittle at or near
room temperature are organic.  It might be possible to improve this
situation with metamaterials — glass fiber, basalt fiber, and steel
coil springs are far from the limits of what can be done.  One of the
simplest “metamaterials” to fabricate is foam.

Candidate minerals
------------------

In addition to styrofoam-like processes, it’s worth thinking about
infusion postprocessing, where after the foam is shaped its cells are
filled with some other material.  This probably requires the cells to
be substantially open rather than closed.  Also, think about painting
(depositing a layer of a different material on the surface, such as a
harder material, maybe a metal) and use as a mold.

### Soda-lime glass ###

Soda-lime glass commonly requires extreme measures to prevent it from
foaming: ingredients to reduce its viscosity and long kiln times to
allow bubbles to escape.  (I’m not sure if precalcination of some of
the ingredients is also used).  Bubbles are one of the most common
obstacles to getting good, clear glass from raw materials.

If you want *more* bubbles instead of none, it seems like it should be
easy to achieve: leave out the viscosity-reduction agents; incorporate
more gas-producing minerals such as boric acid, sodium carbonate and
even bicarbonate, and calcium carbonate, and cool the melt rapidly.

### Waterglass ###

The sodium silicate I have here dries to a glassy, mildly alkaline
substance with a Mohs hardness around 3–4.  Upon heating to around
200–300°, it foams up into a white foam with visible bubbles;
presumably water inside of it is boiling out and the heat has
plasticized the sodium silicate enough to permit bubble formation.
The total volumetric expansion is maybe a factor of 10.  (These are
crude stovetop experiments; my temperature estimate is based on the
fact that a grease spot on the same electric burner had started
smoking shortly before, for example.)  The resulting foamed material
floats and leaves tiny silica-gel sparkles when rolled across my palm.

(I suspect that if I let the dried waterglass sit for a long enough
time, it might become harder by absorbing CO₂ from the air.)

This phenomenon is behind what I hear is the common use of sodium or
potassium silicate as a firestop — upon heating, it foams up to
produce a non-oxidizable insulating layer that stops airflow and heat
transport.

This suggests that it should be possible to use dried sodium silicate
beads or perhaps silica-gel beads to mold and foam up in the same way
as styrofoam.

Since the water doesn’t condense again until a lower temperature at
which the waterglass is no longer plastic, the foam remains foamed
after cooling.  (XXX verify!)

### Perlite and vermiculite ###

These are commonly foamed minerals used in gardening and glassblowing,
able to withstand much higher temperatures without softening than the
materials mentioned above; vermiculite is used as an insulator in
laboratory glassblowing of borosilicate glass, commonly in direct
contact with the hot glass without sticking to it.

They are mostly open-cell foams, which is the reason for their use in
gardening to improve soil drainage.

In both cases, the foaming action is produced by the escape of water
vapor from the mineral under heating; the minerals are found in nature
in their unfoamed form, having formed, I think, under pressure
sufficient to prevent the water from escaping.

### Pumice ###

This rock is naturally foamed during volcanic eruptions; like
obsidian, it is a glass, but it contained a large amount of dissolved
gas which bubbled out of solution during the eruption.  Typically the
foam is sufficiently closed to allow the rock to float.

Pumice is not common, suggesting that unusual circumstances are needed
to produce it; I don’t know if that’s a matter of mineral content,
dissolved-gas content (which might depend on the mineral content), or
rapid cooling (which might not be entirely adiabatic; obsidian
typically depends on water cooling).  More common natural volcanic
mineral foams such as scoria cool much more slowly and typically have
an open-cell macrostructure and a crystalline rather than glassy
amorphous microstructure.

### Concrete ###

Of course foamed portland concrete is a thing.  I ran into a pallet of
stacked foamed-concrete blocks on the sidewalk the other day.  This
works by mixing detergent and air into the water before mixing the
concrete.  While the reduction in weight and consequent improvement in
insulation properties is substantial, as I understand it, it’s rarely
even a factor of 3, let alone the 10–100 of styrofoam.

You could conceivably puff up foamed concrete into a mold before the
cement starts to set, either by initially mixing it under pressure and
then releasing the pressure, or by mixing it at one atmosphere and
then pulling a vacuum once it’s in the mold.  But usually people just
pour it into molds before it sets without fooling around with
pressures.

### Firebrick ###

Insulating refractory firebrick is also a common foamed mineral
product.  Most commonly it is made by mixing the refractory clay with
a filler material which burns out during firing; any carbon or organic
matter will do (I made some using used yerba mate; see file
`ceramics-notes`), and I think sulfur would do as well.  This material
is also amenable to molding in its plastic state.

I was able to get density reduction of up to a factor of 8, but beyond
a factor of 3 the material was noticeably friable.  These foamed
ceramics were enormously easier to cut than regular fired clay, which
tends to shatter whenever you try to cut it, and enormously more
resistant to thermal shock, which I suspect is partly because it’s
softer and partly because of its insulating qualities.

To make this process amenable to execution without organic matter,
you’d have to find a different filler.  This could be something with a
low boiling point (like zinc); something whose oxides have a low
boiling point, as do carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, and sulfur; or
something that decomposes or substantially decomposes into gases at
high temperatures, like nitrate or carbonate.

Alternatively, you might be able to use a styrofoam-like foaming
process, where a gas such as nitrogen or CO₂ is dissolved into the
clay’s water under high pressure, then bubbled out with a release of
pressure.
