I was reading _TeX: The Program_, and in §§220 et seq. explaining *eqtb*
and in particular §§268–284, I found the solution to implementing
PostScript’s `gsave` operator efficiently in an interpreter, a solution
that’s more efficient than either deep binding or the usual approach to
shallow binding.

`gsave` saves the drawing parameters on a stack of drawing parameters,
including not just the current path, but also things like the current
clipping path, the current line dashing pattern, the current line join,
the current line width, the current color, and so on, which change
relatively rarely.  Later, they can be restored with `grestore`.  This
allows code inside the `gsave`/`grestore` pair to change these
parameters with impunity.

Now, the standard shallow binding approach to this problem is to allocate
a new saved-graphics-context object on the saved-graphics-context stack,
copy the entire current-graphics-context to it, and then continue.
To restore, you copy the saved-graphics-context on top of the stack over
the current-graphics-context.  This means that accessing the variables
in the current graphics context is fast, because they’re always in
the same location in memory in the current-graphics-context.  (A slight
variation of this accesses those variables directly on the top item on the
stack, thus making access to them indexed off the stack pointer, which
was slower on old machines but is pretty much just as fast nowadays.)
But, with this approach, `gsave` and `grestore` are fairly slow.

The deep-binding alternative, as I understand it, is to maintain the
graphics context as a stack of setting-value pairs.  To access a
graphics-context variable, you search down the stack until you find it.
This is slow, but `gsave` and `grestore` are much faster, since they
don’t need to copy anything.  But it’s somewhat hairier than deep
binding in its original Lisp context, where you’re pushing some new
bindings onto the stack, because `gsave` doesn’t have a list of graphics
parameters to override; it just arranges for later graphics parameter
changes to be pushed onto the stack.

How can you implement this?  Presumably you need to tag each name-value
pair on the graphics parameter stack with the `gsave` level it belongs
to.  `gsave` increments the level and saves the stack pointer, and
operators like `moveto` or `setlinejoin` first search the stack to find
an entry, then check to see if its tag matches the current level.  If it
matches, they can just overwrite the value with the new value; if it
doesn’t match, they need to push the new level on the parameter stack.
`grestore` then restores the stack pointer and decrements the level.

So variable access is slow, but `gsave` and `grestore` are fast, since
they hardly do any work.  This is not a good tradeoff because you
commonly do several graphics operations per `gsave`/`grestore` pair,
often very many, and those operations typically access several graphics
parameters each.

But wait.  What if we don’t have to search the stack to find the current
value?  This is the TeX approach.  The value of, say, glue between
paragraphs (`par_skip`) is stored in `eqtb[glue_base+2]`, which turns
out to be `eqtb[1+256+256+1+2100+10+257+1+2]`, which is `eqtb[2884]`, a
constant memory address.  But the item stored at that address includes
not just the value of the glue parameter, but also the save level it
came from.  You can ignore that when you’re reading it, but when you’re
setting it, it tells you whether you need to save the old value on the
stack or not.  Then `grestore` (in TeX, “unsave”) iterates over the
save-stack items, restoring their old values, until it hits a level
boundary.

This means that variable access is pretty fast, `gsave` is fast, and
`grestore` only does a small amount of work proportional to the number
of parameters that must be restored — comparable to the work done in
overwriting them in the first place.

Unfortunately I don’t know how to generalize this to a wider class of
problems.  It’s perfect for dynamically-scoped variables and for
propagating a potentially large class of top-down properties down a tree
during a tree traversal.  It’s useful for graphics contexts, where it
offers a much better alternative to copying a whole graphics context
because you want to change a few things in it and a noticeably better
alternative to changing a few things in it and then changing them back.
But it isn’t useful for, for example, Emacs buffer-local variables or
efficiently cloning a heap object from a prototype.
