You can improve some characteristics of 3-D printed FDM things by
filling them with other stuff.

“Filling” with plastics usually means mixing the plastic with
“filler”, originally just some random solid material that was cheaper
than the plastic (thus the name), but often these days something that
imparts other superior properties to the plastic: higher strength and
lower gas permeability in the case of bentonite clay; higher strength
and density, plus reflectiveness in the case of steel or aluminum
(aluminum-filled nylon is what Shapeways calls “alumide”); color;
conductivity, when graphite, silver, or gold is the filler; thermal
conductivity, using e.g. iron oxide; surface texture, as when sawdust
is used as a 30% filler in PLA filament for 3-D printing to produce
“printable wood”; and so on.

That’s not what I’m talking about.  I’m talking about using FDM to
print a hollow shape, and then filling the hollow spaces with some
other material, in order to provide different properties to the
resulting object.  In some cases, you might want to actually remove
the FDM plastic entirely afterwards, sort of like lost-wax casting,
but without the intermediate step of making the negative mold around
your wax positive.

What kinds of properties might you want to get?

Mass
----

Mass is a big one.  FDM is capable of producing impressively light and
thin objects, but it’s a very slow process for massive objects.  And
for many applications, “light and thin” equals “cheap-feeling and
fragile”.  So simply filling a cavity with a cheap, heavy material can
make a big difference.

Here are some materials you could reasonably use for adding mass:

    |                          |  g/cc | max temp                |                                                                                                                                            |
    | paraffin wax             |    .9 | 46°–68°                 | <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paraffin_wax>                                                                                               |
    | water                    |     1 | 0°                      |                                                                                                                                            |
    | sugar syrup              | 1–1.6 | 0°–186°                 | <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sugar>                                                                                                      |
    | silicone caulk           |  1.04 | >260°                   | <http://catalogue.airtech.lu/product.php?product_id=30&lang=EN> <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Silicone_rubber>                            |
    | ABS                      |  1.07 | 210°                    | <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acrylonitrile_butadiene_styrene>                                                                            |
    | epoxy resin              |   1.1 | 78°–162°                | <http://msdssearch.dow.com/PublishedLiteratureDOWCOM/dh_004e/0901b8038004e7b6.pdf?filepath=epoxy/pdfs/noreg/296-00312.pdf&fromPage=GetDoc> |
    | PLA                      |   1.3 | 60°-140°                | <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polylactic_acid>                                                                                            |
    | salt                     |   2.2 | 801°                    | <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Salt#Chemistry>                                                                                             |
    | portland concrete        |   2.2 | 573° (quartz)           |                                                                                                                                            |
    | gypsum (plaster)         |   2.3 |                         | <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gypsum>                                                                                                     |
    | quartz                   |   2.6 | 573° (phase transition) | <http://www.mindat.org/min-3337.html>                                                                                                      |
    | whitewash/chalk/calcite  |   2.7 | 600°                    | <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Calcium_carbonate>                                                                                          |
    | aluminum                 |   2.7 | 660°                    | <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aluminum#Physical> <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solder>                                                   |
    | magnetite                |   5.2 |                         | <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnetite>                                                                                                  |
    | steel                    |     8 |                         | <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Steel#Material_properties>                                                                                  |
    | 37% tin, 63% lead solder |   9.8 | 183°                    | <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solder> <http://www.metallurgy.nist.gov/solder/NIST_LeadfreeSolder_v4.pdf>                                  |
    | lead                     |  11.3 | 327°                    | <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solder> <http://www.metallurgy.nist.gov/solder/NIST_LeadfreeSolder_v4.pdf>                                  |
    | glass powder             |   1.7 | 850° (Ts)               | <http://www.expertsystemsolutions.com/biblio/HSM/sintering%20behavior%20of%20glassceramic%20frits.pdf>                                     |

The cheapest filler material is water, but it also has the lowest
density of any solid here.  All the others listed here are currently
pretty easy to buy in kilogram quantities, a criterion which excludes
otherwise interesting materials like cyanoacrylate, gallium, Wood’s
metal, gelatin, and albumen.

Salt, gypsum, concrete, and whitewash have the property that you can
convert a powder into a solid mass at room temperature by adding water
and, in the case of whitewash, carbon dioxide.  Paraffin is similar in
this, in that you can divide it into grains and then sinter them, but
it also melts at a low enough temperature that you may be able to pour
it into an FDM-printed mold, possibly carrying other filler materials
with it.  (Sugar can also be extruded directly, as Jordan Miller has
done: <http://www.thingiverse.com/thing:26343/#instructions>.)

Epoxy resins and silicone caulks, similarly, will harden at more or
less room temperature, starting in a liquid state.

Flexibility
-----------

Silicone is flexible and high-temperature tolerant.

Removing FDM plastic
--------------------

You should be able to melt PLA or ABS off of silicone once it’s
hardened; also of concrete, salt, plaster, chalk, or metals.  You can
also dissolve ABS with acetone or PLA with a mixture of alcohol
(ideally propanol, although I’ve heard ethanol or even water works
too) and sodium hydroxide.  Weld-On #5 solvent also works to dissolve
PLA, but it's nasty, nasty shit, made of methylene chloride, glacial
acetic acid, and methyl methacrylate monomer.  Miller-Stephenson
MS-111 stripping agent can also dissolve PLA, and also epoxy (!!)
<https://groups.google.com/forum/#!topic/ultimaker/8s1bq_9LsRM>.
<http://www.vinland.com/blog/?p=68>.  MS-111 is 50% methylene
chloride, 20% phenol, 15% formic acid and will blister your skin.

Dichloroethane can supposedly also dissolve PLA.  

Acetone, MEK, tetrahydrofuran, and TCE will plasticize PLA but not
dissolve it.  I think all three of them will dissolve ABS, and MEK and
TCE may be more available here in Argentina than acetone.

Ethyl acetate can vapor-polish PLA, which suggests it can dissolve it:
http://www.printedsolid.com/smoothpla/

My attempts to polish PLA with ethyl acetate, or dissolve it in a test
tube, were unsuccessful.
