A common technique in modern music (going back to the Beatles) is to
sweep a comb filter over the frequencies.  One variant of this is for
no particularly good reason called “flanging”, but there are others.

Another common technique is to use FM synthesis, in which the time
axis is distorted according to a modulator waveform.  Typically this
differs from the kind of FM used in FM radio in that, in FM radio, the
modulator is many octaves lower than the carrier, while in FM
synthesis, typically they are the same frequency or an octave or two
apart, so the waveform repeats with the same period as the
carrier — so the FM distortion merely produces harmonic distortion,
rather than inharmonic sidebands.  A typical technique is to gradually
reduce the “depth of modulation” down to zero, thus causing the
harmonics thus produced to die away, just as the overtones of a string
or a bell do.

An interesting thing about FM synthesis is that the carrier wave being
distorted is almost invariably a simple sinewave.  It would be
interesting to use some kind of frequency and phase tracking to apply
the same kind of “FM” periodic time-domain distortion to a wave from
some other source, such as a singer’s voice.

Most children in the rich world have done something similar by talking
or singing through the blades of a spinning box fan to make a “robot
voice”, which provides a sawtooth “FM” distortion of time at
frequencies somewhat lower than voice frequencies, perhaps 50–100 Hz,
and without phase tracking of them.
