How can you do process intensification of fractional crystallization
cascades?

Freeze distillation or fractional crystallization is normally a slow
process.  But they still work even if the crystals are very small, so
there’s no need for them to be slow.  You could carry them out at
frequencies in the neighborhood of 1 Hz using something like a
phase-change regenerator.  The “coolant” of the “regenerator” is
probably something innocuous like brine, while the phase-change
material in the “regenerator” is the material you’re actually trying
to separate by partial crystallization, and it isn’t quite stationary:
you pump the liquid phase in a direction parallel to the direction of
the coolant, but 90° out of phase with the pumping of the coolant.

That is, 

1. First, you pump the coolant from the cold reservoir to the hot
   reservoir, freezing some of the phase-change material.  Then,
2. you pump the liquid part of the phase-change material (the mother
   liquor) toward the cold reservoir (that is, in the same direction,
   but in a separate isolated circuit). Then,
3. you pump the coolant from the hot reservoir back to the cold
   reservoir, melting some of the phase-change material.  Then,
4. you pump the mother liquor toward the hot reservoir.  Then you
   start again.

This should result in concentrating the lowest-melting solution of the
phase-change mixture toward the cold reservoir, and the higher-melting
parts toward the warm reservoir, while more or less maintaining the
temperature gradient constant.  The temperature swing may be more than
you would expect, because metastable zone width increases with
stirring and cooling rate, and our stirring and cooling rate here is
yuuge.

If at some point the phase-change material passages are completely
blocked, you can pump warm coolant past it until that’s no longer the
case.

Separated phase-change material can be removed at the extremes of the
apparatus, and unseparated material can be added to replace it in the
middle, providing a quasi-continuous process.

This process should be sensitive enough to separate substances by even
very slight differences in solubility, including difficult cases like
separating erbium bromate from holmium bromate or separating heavy
from normal water.  It might even be capable of competing with
ion-exchange chromatography.  The regenerator-like configuration
eliminates nearly all of the energy waste associated with traditional
fractional crystallization cascades.

It’s important for the piping to be narrow enough to prevent diffusion
of the liquid phase-change mixture against the concentration gradient
from becoming turbulent rather than viscous, and also to prevent the
diffusion of heat against the temperature gradient, since narrower
passages are longer for constant volume; additionally, narrower
passages mean that heat diffuses between the coolant and the
phase-change material more rapidly, allowing higher frequencies.
However, narrower passages require more energy applied both to pump
the fluids and to restore the temperature difference between the
reservoirs.

If both fluids are liquids, it may be desirable to carry out the
entire process under high pressure or even to alternate between
pressures (in addition to or instead of pumping coolant) to alter the
equilibrium phases of the phase-change material.  This may allow an
escape from pernicious eutectics.  Doing this with a gaseous coolant
might be feasible but seems like it would be very difficult due to
adiabatic heating and possible deformation of the apparatus.

Here are some possible materials, depending on the temperature range
in which the material to be separated solidifies:

    |-------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------|
    | temperature range | coolant               | piping                        |
    |-------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------|
    | <-200°            | LN₂                   | copper                        |
    |                   |                       | brass                         |
    |                   |                       | cryogenic stainless           |
    |-------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------|
    | -200°–-100°       | ethane (to -182°)     | cryogenic stainless           |
    |                   | R-32 (to -136°)       | brass                         |
    |                   | R-22 (to -175°)       | copper                        |
    |                   | propane (to -187°)    |                               |
    |-------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------|
    | -100°–-20°        | ethanol (to -120°)    | silicone                      |
    |                   | propylene glycol      | copper                        |
    |                   | (to -59°)             | brass                         |
    |                   | R-134a                | low-temperature stainless     |
    |                   | SF₆ (to -50°)         |                               |
    |                   | R-22 (below -40°)     |                               |
    |-------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------|
    | -20°–0°           | brine                 | polyethylene                  |
    |                   | ethanol               | polyethylene terephthalate    |
    |                   | propylene glycol      | silicone                      |
    |                   |                       | copper                        |
    |                   |                       | stainless                     |
    |                   |                       | steel                         |
    |                   |                       | brass                         |
    |                   |                       | glass                         |
    |                   |                       | aluminum                      |
    |                   |                       | PTFE                          |
    |-------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------|
    | 0°–200°           | water                 | polyethylene                  |
    |                   | mineral oil           | PET                           |
    |                   | propylene glycol      | glass                         |
    |                   | (to 188°)             | silicone                      |
    |                   | glycerol              | polyimide                     |
    |                   | ethanol               | copper                        |
    |                   | silicone oil          | stainless                     |
    |                   |                       | steel                         |
    |                   |                       | brass                         |
    |                   |                       | bronze                        |
    |                   |                       | aluminum                      |
    |                   |                       | PTFE                          |
    |-------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------|
    | 200°–500°         | molten nitrate salts  | borosilicate glass            |
    |                   | fluorocarbons         | stainless                     |
    |                   | lead-tin eutectic     | polyimide                     |
    |                   | type metal (Sn/Pb/Sb) | copper                        |
    |                   | FLiNaK                | brass                         |
    |                   | FLiBe                 | bronze                        |
    |                   | NaK, Na, PbSb         |                               |
    |                   | tin                   | aluminum                      |
    |                   | air                   | steel                         |
    |                   | CO₂                   |                               |
    |                   | glycerol (to 290°)    |                               |
    |                   | steam                 |                               |
    |                   | silicone oil          |                               |
    |-------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------|
    | 500°–1000°        | molten nitrate salts  | fused quartz                  |
    |                   | Sn/Pb, Sn/Pb/Sb, Sn   | stainless                     |
    |                   | FLiNaK, FLiBe         | superalloys                   |
    |                   | air                   | fluorination may be desirable |
    |                   | noble gases           | noble metals                  |
    |                   | CO₂                   |                               |
    |                   | nitrogen              |                               |
    |-------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------|
    | 1000°–1200°       | Al, Pb, Li            | stainless                     |
    |                   | CO₂                   | superalloys                   |
    |                   | nitrogen              | noble metals                  |
    |                   | noble gases           | fused quartz                  |
    |-------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------------|

(All of the above is kind of a guess, not deep materials knowledge.)

Presumably the only temperature limit on the applicability of the
process is being able to find piping materials that melt hotter than
the materials you’re trying to separate and that won’t significantly
dissolve in or react with the materials you’re separating at their
melting point.  (You don’t want total nonreactivity, though, because
you need the crystals to nucleate, ideally on the walls.)  I just
don’t know what to propose above 1200°.
