I am constantly frustrated with the inadequacies of the computer
systems we have so far achieved, and I am unconvinced that our current
approaches to designing them will get us to a better situation.  Yet I
am devoting almost none of my time to improving the situation — even
on the most personal level of coming up with a reasonable individual
email system.

I want to fix this.  I want to write a computing system that provides
a reasonable self-hosted development environment for the kinds of
things I want to work on, allowing me to use the unbelievably huge
existing free software ecosystem without being limited by it.  I found
out two days ago that not one but two of my coworkers at Satellogic
have already done this, to one extent or another, with Smalltalk.
Juan reports that his system, Cuis, is only about eighty thousand
lines of code.  Richie’s system, Bee, may be bigger or smaller, but
it’s more to my taste.

It seems clear that the issue is that I’m not treating the
self-sufficient computing environment project as a priority, in part
because of Satellogic.  If I’m going to make progress on it, I need to
spend time on it each day, probably instead of Twitter or some shit
like that.

A thing that would really help a lot with that would be some kind of
ability to use the iPhone to make progress on it while I’m in
transit — a little ratchet of progress.

I think a reasonable target might be the “100,000 words” of a 300-page
novel, say, 600 kilobytes or so.  At five “words” per “line”, that
would be the same “20,000 lines” of the STEPS project.
