Using the Goertzel algorithm, the Minsky algorithm, PLLs, and prefix sums for frequency detection
=================================================================================================

Windowing the results of the Goertzel algorithm, or the Minsky circle
algorithm applied as a frequency detector, over different-sized
windows, can provide frequency detection with variable levels of
precision.  Some kinds of PLLs can be used in the same way, and you
can adapt the Goertzel algorithm or the Minsky algorithm into a PLL.
The Hogenauer-filter approach can provide very nice windows very
cheaply.

The Goertzel algorithm and windowing it with prefix sums
--------------------------------------------------------

The Goertzel algorithm, as explained in `cheap-frequency-detection`,
accumulates a sequence of values with a resonant frequency: *sₙ* =
(2 cos ω) *sₙ*₋₁ - *sₙ*₋₂ + *xₙ*.  You can verify that, if *xₙ* = 0,
this holds true of the sequence *sₙ* = *a* sin (ω*n* + φ) for any *a*
and φ.  First, consider the case *a* = 1, φ = 0:

> *sₙ* = (2 cos ω)(sin (ω(*n* - 1))) - sin (ω(*n* - 2))

The formula above is a little more symmetrical if we rewrite it with
*m* = *n* - 1:

> *sₘ*₊₁ = (2 cos ω)(sin (ω*m*)) - sin (ω(*m* - 1))

If you were forced to memorize horrible angle-sum formulas in
high-school trigonometry and have since forgotten them, you can
trivially rederive them from Euler’s formula *eⁱᵗ* = cos *t* + *i* sin
*t*; if *t* = *h* + *j*, this becomes *eⁱʰeⁱʲ* = (cos *h* + *i* sin
*h*)(cos *j* + *i* sin *j*) = (cos *h* cos *j* - sin *h* sin *j* + *i*
(cos *h* sin *j* + sin *h* cos *j*)), so cos (*h* + *j*) = cos *h* cos
*j* - sin *h* sin *j*, and sin (*h* + *j*) = cos *h* sin *j* + sin *h*
cos *j*.

Here, we’re interested in these identities:

> sin (ω(*m* + 1)) = sin (ω*m* + ω) = sin (ω*m*) cos ω + cos (ω*m*) sin ω  
> sin (ω(*m* - 1)) = sin (ω*m* - ω) = sin (ω*m*) cos ω - cos (ω*m*) sin ω

The second one gives us

> *sₘ*₊₁ = (2 cos ω)(sin (ω*m*)) - sin (ω*m*) cos ω + cos (ω*m*) sin ω  
> = (2 cos ω)(sin (ω*m*)) - cos ω sin (ω*m*) + cos (ω*m*) sin ω  
> = cos ω sin (ω*m*) + cos (ω*m*) sin ω

which above is established as the value of sin (ω(*m* + 1)), so *sₘ*₊₁
= sin (ω(*m* + 1)).

To establish that this is true for all values of *a* and φ, we can
simply note that this is a linear time-invariant recurrence:

> *sₙ* = (2 cos ω) *sₙ*₋₁ - *sₙ*₋₂ + *xₙ*

*m* or *n* does not enter into it except as an index, and the output
on the left is linear in all the inputs on the right.

This is the unique way to get a sine wave of a fixed angular frequency
ω as such a linear recurrence on the two previous terms, sin (ω*n*) =
*sₙ* = *asₙ*₋₁ + *bsₙ*₋₂; that is, if you solve that equation for *a*
and *b*, the only possible values for *a* and *b* are 2 cos ω and -1.

I think it’s somewhat trickier to show is that, if *s*₀ = *s*₁ = 0,
*sₙ* and *sₙ*₋₁ form a linear encoding of Σ*ⱼxⱼ*cis (ω*j*) for *j* ∈
[2, n].  But it’s true; unless I’m confusing something,
Σ*ⱼxⱼ*cis (ω(*n*-*j*)) = *yₖ* = *sₖ* - exp(-*i* ω) *sₖ*₋₁.  *sₖ* is,
of course, a linear function of any such previous sequence of *sₙ*,
*sₙ*₋₁ and the *xⱼ* since that point, since it’s a linear function of
*xₖ* and *sₖ*₋₁ and *sₖ*₋₂, which themselves are such a linear
function.

The impulse response of this system makes it clear — an impulse in *x*
will kick off a proportional sinusoidal oscillation in *s*.

So at any point along the accumulation of this sequence, we can
extract the dot product between the complex exponential *eⁱʲ* and the
*x* samples so far.  In effect, the Goertzel algorithm computes the
prefix sum of a particular frequency component of our signal, just in
a slightly obtusely-encoded form.

(Note that this is precisely one of the components of the Fourier
transform of the signal over that interval.)

### Using *sₖ* as a prefix sum to rectangularly window a frequency component ###

This means that, if we want to know how much of a particular frequency
was present during a given time interval, and we’ve saved off the *sₖ*
values for that time interval, we can just do the *yₖ* calculation for
the two points above, perhaps apply a rotation to bring them into
phase (if they aren’t separated by an integer number of cycles), and
take the difference.  (This assumes that we aren’t getting rounding
errors, but since we’re essentially computing a sum table here, our
*s* values will grow without bound if the signal *x* contains a
nonzero frequency component at the frequency of interest.  As with
Hogenauer filters, it might be wise to do the calculation in purely
integer math to avoid this.)

This subtraction amounts to temporally windowing the signal with a
rectangular window.  So it convolves the spectral response of the
filter with the Fourier transform of that rectangular window, which is
a sinc.  So, by using different widths of window on *the same sₖ
signal*, we can get different levels of frequency selectivity.  And in
fact we can do this with only a single multiply-subtract and addition
per sample (since the factor 2 cos ω is fixed as long as we don’t
change the frequency), even though we’re pulling out a number of
different window widths from that single resonator.

### Goertzel without multiplies and A440 even temperament ###

The multiply-subtract (2 cos ω)*sₙ*₋₁ - *sₙ*₋₂ can, for some angles,
be done with a couple of subtracts and bit shifts: (*sₙ*₋₁ << 1) -
(*sₙ*₋₁ >> p) - *sₙ*₋₂.  This works when 2 cos ω = 2 - (1 >> p) and
thus ω = cos⁻¹ (1 - (1 >> (p + 1))).  This gives the following
periods for shift lengths from 0 to 20 bits:

    >>> 360/(numpy.arccos(1-2**-(1 + numpy.arange(20.0)))*180/numpy.pi)
    array([    6.        ,     8.69363162,    12.43307536,    17.67813872,
              25.06699928,    35.49668062,    50.23272124,    71.06297418,
             100.51459792,   142.16068241,   201.05374803,   284.33872284,
             402.11976897,   568.68612356,   804.245674  ,  1137.37658591,
            1608.49441598,  2274.75534121,  3216.99036595,  4549.51176711])

For the particular case of 44.1-ksps audio, these work out to the
following frequencies in Hz:

    >>> 44100/(360/(numpy.arccos(1-2**-(1 + numpy.arange(20.0)))*180/numpy.pi))
    array([ 7350.        ,  5072.67870839,  3546.99048555,  2494.60651377,
            1759.28516646,  1242.3696873 ,   877.91381613,   620.57633403,
             438.74224154,   310.21235444,   219.34433171,   155.09670846,
             109.6688186 ,    77.54717088,    54.83399094,    38.77343753,
              27.41694317,    19.38670028,    13.70846505,     9.69334783])

These are far closer to A440 musical note frequencies than we would
have any right to expect; 438.7 Hz is about 5 cents flat of A₄ (A
above middle C), and 877.9 is only about 4.1 cents flat of A₅, and the
frequencies that are not As are even-tempered D♯/E♭ notes.  It crosses
over from being sharp to being flat in between 2494 and 3546 Hz,
precisely where the human ear is most perceptive.

### Better windows through Nth-order prefix sums ###

Usually we don’t think of sinc as being a very good filter frequency
response, because well into the stopbands, you keep getting these
response peaks where an odd number of half-waves fit into your window.
The Hogenauer-filter approach to solving this problem is to use N
levels of sum tables to get an Nth-order approximation of a Gaussian
window, which in theory has the optimal tradeoff between frequency
precision and temporal precision — the minimal joint uncertainty,
according to the uncertainty principle.  If we consider the *yₖ* given
above as representing values in a complex-valued sum table, we could
compute running sums (prefix sums) of them to get Nth-order prefix
sums, which we can then differentiate N times in the usual CIC-filter
way to get a given frequency component with that window.

But calculating the *yₖ* is considerably more expensive than
calculating the *sₖ*: *yₖ* = *sₖ* - exp(-*i* ω) *sₖ*₋₁, so while
calculating *sₖ* required a single *real* multiply, addition, and
subtraction (presuming all real *xⱼ*), calculating *yₖ* requires a
*complex*–real multiply and then a complex–real subtraction: two real
multiplies and a real subtraction, which is twice the multiplies.
Normally we sweep this under the rug by presuming that we only
calculate *y* values occasionally, so this expense doesn’t matter, but
to compute the prefix sum (+\\*y*, in APL notation) we would need to
do those multiplications for every sample, and then it would matter.
Also, computing complex prefix sums would involve twice as many real
additions as computing real prefix sums.

But in fact we can avoid this hassle; Σ*ₖyₖ* = Σ*ₖ*(*sₖ* - exp(-*i* ω)
*sₖ*₋₁) = Σ*ₖsₖ* - exp(-*i* ω)Σ*ₖsₖ*₋₁, so we can do that whole
computation using a sum table for *s* which we use twice, instead of
computing separate real and imaginary Nth-order sums.  Then we can
compute a *y* value windowed with an Nth-order approximation to a
Gaussian window using N real subtractions, a complex–real multiply,
and a real subtraction.  The same Nth-order sum table will serve for
any window size.  XXX is this right?  Or do we need to either do N
subtractions per sample or N(N-1)/2 subtractions per output?  Or maybe
decimate by the window width M and then do the N subtractions once
every M samples?

### Roundoff ###

However, this surely requires special measures to avoid roundoff for
the Hogenauer-filter part of the computation; the values in a
third-order sum table, over an interval where the signal is roughly
constant, will grow proportional to the cube of the constant value.
The standard approach is to implement Hogenauer filters using integer
arithmetic with wraparound, thus entirely eliminating rounding error.
Maybe an alternative exists, representing the sum tables using the
tree constructed in the standard parallel prefix-sum algorithm, so
that the values being added at each tree node are of comparable size
and roundoff lossage is insignificant; but I suspect you need to
traverse the tree at subtraction time, adding a logarithmic slowdown,
and I’m not sure how this generalizes to second-order and higher sum
tables.

Even without sum tables, it’s a frequently noted observation that the
Goertzel algorithm is prone to numerical error.

### Frequency detection ###

So you could imagine using this approach to narrow down the frequency
range where a particular signal might be in your input: first use very
short windows to see if there’s anything in the frequency range at
all, then use longer windows at a larger number of frequencies (some
of which might be the same frequency — just using the same prefix sums
with a longer window width) to figure out where the signal or signals
might be inside that window.

Alternatively, if your signal is sparse enough in frequency space, you
can use a temporal window size long enough that only one significant
frequency component will be within the corresponding frequency window,
and then use its successive phases in successive overlapping windows
to determine its real frequency, the way a phase vocoder does.  So,
for example, in `bleep`, I want to detect tones at 17640 Hz and
19110 Hz.  I could very reasonably use the Goertzel algorithm with a
frequency window centered on 18375 Hz, whose beat frequency with
either 17640 or 19110 Hz is 735 Hz; that means that every 1.36
milliseconds (60 samples at 44.1ksps) the phase relationship between
the reference frequency and the real frequency will shift by 90°.  So
if I perform Goertzel for that frequency over nominally 15-sample
windows, I should get a nice clear phase that I can unwrap.  I haven’t
tried this yet.

(18375 Hz is 2.6180 radians or 150° per sample, so the Goertzel
recurrence becomes roughly *sₙ* = -1.732 *sₙ*₋₁ - *sₙ*₋₂.)

Alternatively, suppose I’m trying to detect the tune I’m whistling as
in file `whistle-detection`, in the band 600Hz to 1600Hz.  Typically
if I’m whistling it’ll be the loudest sound in that band, maybe 20 to
40 dB louder than anything else nearby.  Suppose we have a whistle at
1477Hz and we’re trying to detect it by windowing a 1400Hz Goertzel
filter; we’ll get a phase spinning around the circle at 77Hz.  So if
our window mostly averages over, say, 3 ms (4.2 cycles of the 1400Hz
reference), the phase will rotate around almost one quadrant,
attenuating the phasor’s average magnitude by about √2, or 1.5 dB.  By
unwrapping the phase (again, like a phase vocoder) we can determine
the beat frequency and phase direction, and thus the real frequency.
So windowing a single Goertzel filter about 500 times a second covers
about 200Hz of bandwidth, so about five or ten of them should cover
the whole band of interest.

As long as the window is pretty close to Gaussian, there’s a
relatively precise reciprocal relationship between the bandwidth and
necessary number of windows per second for each filter.  Using a
window that’s half as long requires us to use twice as many windows
per second, but also covers twice the bandwidth in a single filter, so
we need half as many filter center frequencies.  In the limit, where
our windowed filter kernel is just an impulse, we’re just trying to
“unwrap the phase” of individual samples (or perhaps pairs of samples,
since *yₖ* uses *sₖ*₋₁ as well).  At the other extreme, with a very
large number of very narrow frequency bands, each with windows tens or
hundreds of milliseconds long, we only need check each band every
hundred or more milliseconds, but we start losing temporal precision.

But at that point, wouldn’t it be faster to window a downconverted
signal and do a Fast Fourier Transform?  Then we only have to do
O(lg *N*) work per sample to get each of *N* frequency bands instead
of O(*N*) work.

(Perhaps the best way to understand the CIC-windowed Goertzel filter
in this context is precisely that it’s providing a windowed
downconverted signal, which we can then Fourier-transform if we like?)

The Minsky algorithm
--------------------

One way to think of the Goertzel algorithm’s oscillator is by linearly
extrapolating to the current sample, then subtracting a correction to
make it curve back towards zero at the desired frequency.

> *sₙ* = (2 cos ω) *sₙ*₋₁ - *sₙ*₋₂  
> = *sₙ*₋₁ + (*sₙ*₋₁ - *sₙ*₋₂) - 2(1 - cos ω)*sₙ*₋₁

In essence, it’s calculating the desired second derivative by
multiplying a small negative number, -2(1 - cos ω), by the latest
sample.  While this is in theory exactly correct, it’s easy to see
that it could give rise to significant roundoff errors for
sufficiently low frequencies.  In the limit, where cos ω rounds to 1,
it will stop oscillating entirely and merely linearly extrapolate.
For angular velocities ω approaching 0, 1 - cos ω = ½ω² + O(ω⁴), which
is why changing this correction by factors of 2 in the above note
about multiplication-free Goertzel resulted in changing the frequency
by roughly half an octave.

(However, don’t be mislead into thinking that this means it’s merely a
quadratic approximation that will fail at high frequencies.  As shown
earlier, it’s exact.)

The Minsky algorithm is similar to the Goertzel algorithm, but while
the Goertzel algorithm effectively calculates the current derivative
of the oscillation from the difference between the last two samples,
the Minsky algorithm reifies the derivative as a separate variable:

> *sₙ* = *sₙ*₋₁ + ε*cₙ*-₁ + *xₙ*  
> *cₙ* = *cₙ*₋₁ - ε*sₙ*

This requires two real multiplications per input sample instead of
Goertzel’s one multiplication, but I hypothesize that it should have a
smaller roundoff error; ε ≈ sin ω, which means that for small angular
velocities, it’s proportional to the angular velocity rather than (as
in Goertzel) the square of the angular velocity.  So sometimes you can
get more accurate results with Minsky.

Both Minsky and Goertzel are stable, in the limited sense that they
don’t go to infinity over an infinite interval when the input is zero,
if computed without roundoff.  (They are *not* BIBO stable, of
course.)  The argument that Minsky is stable is that we can rewrite
the above system as follows when *xₙ* = 0:

> *sₙ* = *sₙ*₋₁ + ε*cₙ*-₁  
> *cₙ* = (1 - ε²)*cₙ*₋₁ - ε*sₙ*₋₁

In Unicode-art matrix form:

    ⎡ sₙ ⎤ = ⎡  1   ε   ⎤ ⎡ sₙ₋₁ ⎤
    ⎣ cₙ ⎦   ⎣ -ε  1-ε² ⎦ ⎣ cₙ₋₁ ⎦

The determinant of that matrix is precisely 1.  (XXX but its
**L**<sup>∞</sup> norm is 1+ε; what’s up with that?)

In a sense, *sₙ* and *cₙ* are temporally offset from one another by
half a sample, and we are thus doing leapfrog integration of the
harmonic-oscillator ODE *s̈* = -ε*s*.  For slow oscillators, this is a
small difference, so *sₙ*² + *cₙ*² is a fairly precise estimate of the
energy in the system, but for fast oscillators it can be a large one.
I think “Minsky’s and Trinsky’s” has calculated the exact expression
for the correction, but I can’t remember.

(It’s easy enough to add an exponential decay to either Goertzel or
Minsky, which results in the system state at any given time being an
exponentially-windowed filter of the frequency of interest, but here
I’m focusing on the prefix-sum-based approaches because I think they
can produce nicer windows almost as cheaply.)

A PLL in one line of C
----------------------

In 2012, after struggling with software PLLs (“SPLLs”) for a while, I
wrote [this obfuscated one-line first-order PLL][1]:

    main(a,b){for(;;)putchar(b+=16+(a+=(b&256?1:-1)*getchar()-a/512)/1024);}

[1]: http://canonical.org/~kragen/sw/netbook-misc-devel/tinypll.c

If you compile it to an executable called `tinypll` on a Linux machine
with ALSA or an ALSA emulation, you can run it with the command
`arecord | ./tinypll | aplay`; it tries to emit a tone that tracks the
pitch of your voice, but one octave higher.  This works better with
headphones, so that the microphone isn’t picking up the tone it’s
emitting.

(`arecord` and `aplay` default to 8000 unsigned 8-bit samples per
second, which is convenient since it means we can use `getchar()` and
`putchar()` to read and write samples.)

This isn’t a very good PLL, but I think it’s an excellent way to show
the anatomy of a PLL.  It contains two continuously-varying state
variables, `a` and `b`.  `b`, or rather the low 9 bits of `b`, is the
phase accumulator of an oscillator, while `a` is the low-pass-filtered
error from the phase detector.

When the program gets an input sample with `getchar()`, it feeds it
into a “chopper”:

    (b&256 ? 1 : -1) * getchar()

Since the low 9 bits of `b` are the phase accumulator for the
oscillator, its bit 8 tells us which half of the oscillation we’re in.
And, as the oscillator alternates between the halves, it either
inverts the input signal, or it doesn’t.

How does that chopper compute a phase error?  Well, if we suppose that
the input signal is an oscillation whose frequency is close to that of
the PLL’s oscillator, then the sum of that chopped signal over a whole
cycle tells us the relative phase.  If the two oscillations are
perfectly in phase, then we’re inverting precisely the negative part
of the input signal, and so we get a large positive number.  If
they’re perfectly out of phase, then we’re inverting precisely its
positive part, so we get a large negative number.  And if they’re in
perfect quadrature, then the samples we inverted are half negative and
half positive (and cancel each other out), and so are the samples we
didn’t invert, so we get zero.  If there’s a small phase error from
quadrature, say so that we’re inverting a little more of the negative
signal than the positive one, we’ll get a small negative number.  And
any DC bias cancels out.

So a sum over a whole oscillation of this chopped signal gives us some
kind of indication of how far away we are from quadrature, and close
to quadrature it’s linear.  So naturally the next thing we do is to
add that phase-error sample into our phase-error accumulator:

    a += … - a/512

To sum over precisely a whole oscillation would require keeping in
memory an array of values to run a rectangular window over, so here we
just use an exponential filter with a time constant of 512 samples,
which is 64 milliseconds.  (This is guaranteed to be several cycles
long over the frequency range we can reach here.)  Note that this also
means that the magnitude of `a` is about 512 times bigger than the
chopped input samples getting fed into it — if our average phase error
is about 3 per sample, say, then `a` reaches a steady state at `a` ≈
1536.

So, then we want to drive our oscillator at a frequency that depends
on this filtered phase error:

    b += 16 + (a …)/1024

If our input signal is always 0, `a` will decay to 0, and this simply
reduces to `b += 16`, which means it will reach 512 and its low 9 bits
will wrap around every 32 samples, which is 250 Hz.  So that’s the
“natural frequency” of the chopping.  But if `a` is in the range, say,
1024 to 2047, then this is `b += 17` and it pitches up to 265 Hz.  On
most systems C division rounds towards 0, so if `a` is slightly
negative, it doesn’t lower the pitch, but once it gets to -1024, the
pitch drops to 234 Hz.

So if you’re screeching at your computer at 234 Hz, the chopper will
initially drift in and out of phase with your screech 16 times a
second, but if it ever manages to accumulate a phase error of -1024 in
`a`, it enters a steady state where it’s chopping your signal just
enough out of quadrature to maintain that -1024.  If it falls behind
your screeching, `a` will decay and the chopping will speed up until
`a` is growing again, and if it gets ahead of your screeching, `a`
will grow to an even more negative value and its chopping will slow
down.

This sounds ridiculously crude, but there’s a certain amount of noise
on `a` from the regular increases and decreases of the phase error
accumulator four times per cycle (about every 8 samples), plus actual
signal noise, so it works better than you would think.  Not that well,
but better than you’d think.

Finally, it emits an output tone:

    for (;;) putchar(b…);

This is the low 8 bits of the 9-bit phase accumulator in `b`, so it
produces a triangle wave at twice the chopping frequency, so, in the
neighborhood of 500 Hz.  Triangle waves sound really harsh, but
because they’re so harmonics-rich, they make it easier to hear pitch
changes than smoother waveforms would.

Notes on SPLLs in general, and using real sinusoids with them
-------------------------------------------------------------

The ramp up and down of the phase error accumulator at twice the
frequency being detected is called “VCO control line ripple” or
“reference spurious” in analog PLLs.  This is often a thing you want
to minimize, though in this case the noise it adds probably improves
system performance through stochastic resonance.  You could
notch-filter this frequency out with a simple feedforward comb filter
by the simple expedient of averaging two samples from the phase error
signal half an oscillation apart (adjusting this, ideally, to the
current oscillation frequency); or, since doing this requires a table
of past phase-error samples anyway, use a prefix sum to calculate a
simple moving average, a box filter, of that width, and dispense with
the exponential.  Box filters have a better
noise-suppression/tracking-latency tradeoff than exponentials anyway.

I think there’s an even simpler solution, though: in a digital system,
it probably isn’t necessary to update the phase error after every
input sample anyway; you can do that processing at a lower sample
rate, which filters out fast oscillations by construction.

Although the overall system isn’t linear, it has a lot of linear
pieces in it.  This phase detector, for example, produces an output
signal that’s proportional to the amplitude of the waveform it’s
locking onto.  If the waveform is near a local extremum where it gets
chopped from negative to positive, then the phase-detector output is
also locally linear in the phase error.  The chopper frequency shift
is linear in the filtered phase error signal, and the exponential
filter on that signal is linear and time invariant.

Each of these components — the phase detector, the feedback-loop
low-pass filter, the variable-frequency oscillator, and the feedback
path from the oscillator to the phase detector — has lots of possible
realizations.  This particular phase detector is called a “type I”
phase detector, but there are also “type II” phase detctors.  And
there are higher-order PLLs, which I don’t understand at all.  I’m
pretty much just sticking to basic PLLs here because that’s all I
understand at all.

Chopping with a square wave means your PLL is sensitive not only to
its nominal frequency but also its odd harmonics.  There are cases
where this doesn’t matter, but in particular if you’re doing this on a
sampled signal, the odd harmonics can alias down to other strange
frequencies.  In my 18375-Hz example above, for example, the third
harmonic would be 55125 Hz — probably heavily attenuated by the
antialiasing filter on your sound card, but at 44.1ksps, it aliases
down to 11025 Hz.  The fifth harmonic is even worse: it aliases to
3675 Hz.  (Subsequent harmonics repeat this cycle backwards and
forwards.)

And, indeed, that’s what you see if you analyze the output of this
program:

    #include <stdio.h>
    int i;
    int main(){for(;;)putchar(i++*18375*16/44100&8?0:128);}

Feed it to `head -c 44100 | sox -r 44100 -t raw -u1 - sqwv.wav`, hit
^C, run `audacity sqwv.wav`, and plot the spectrum, and there are
three sharp peaks at 18375 Hz, 11025 Hz, and 3675 Hz, just as
predicted.  And if you were multiplying that oscillation pointwise by
an input signal to try to do phase detection, you’d be detecting all
three of those frequencies, too.

So you may actually prefer to multiply by a real sine wave at the
frequency of oscillation, which of course is what the Goertzel and
Minsky resonators do; they also both have the advantage that they can
give you a phase readout fairly directly, rather than using these
subtle arguments about halves of chopped waves canceling each other
out.  But to use them for this application, you need to be able to
adjust their resonant frequency.

A thing to notice is that, in this single-line SPLL, there’s nothing
left over that tells you if you actually have a signal or just
silence.  `a` will be 0 if you’re perfectly locked onto a strong
250-Hz signal or if the signal is all zeroes.  `a` might be 2048
because it’s locked onto a really strong signal around 281 Hz, or a
weak one, or because it’s randomly being buffeted by strong random
noise.  To get the signal amplitude, you can chop the input signal
with a second chopper in quadrature with the one you use for phase
detection; this chopper will be in phase with the input signal instead
of in quadrature with it, and so it amounts to synchronous
rectification of the input signal.  (The Goertzel or Minsky approach
does this implicitly.)

This in-phase-chopped signal gives you the amplitude of the
oscillation at the frequency of interest (and, as noted above,
potentially some other frequencies too).  Earlier I had suggested
using a box filter in the feedback path to eliminate phase-error
ripple, using a prefix sum calculated over some segment of the
quadrature-chopped signal.  By computing an analogous prefix sum of
the in-phase-chopped signal, you can enable the same kind of
after-the-fact frequency selectivity described in the earlier sections
about fixed-frequency Minsky and Goertzel resonators: by subtracting
two nearby samples on the I-chopped and Q-chopped prefix sums, you can
detect signals over a wider bandwidth, or by subtracting prefix-sum
samples with a large lag between them, you can detect them over a very
narrow bandwidth.  For better or worse, your detection band chirps
along with your PLL oscillator.

There is presumably no PLL equivalent to the phase-vocoder-like use of
the fixed-frequency oscillators that I mentioned above, since the
whole point of using a PLL is that it finds the frequency of the
signal of interest and follows it.

Altering the frequency has some subtle effects which may introduce
numerical errors here.  As mentioned earlier, for fast Minsky
oscillators, the half-sample offset between the two state variables
becomes significant; altering the frequency will alter that
relationship, and might rob energy from the system or add energy to
it.  Similarly, with Goertzel, lowering the frequency can add energy
to the system, but won’t always — it depends on what part of the
oscillation *s* is in.  (I don’t know if it can also rob energy from
it.)  Presumably we can work out how to correct these errors.

Related work
------------

I ran across a 2015 paper by Sridharan, Chitti Babu, MuthuKannana, and
Krithika entitled “Modelling of Sliding Goertzel DFT (SGDFT)…” which
seems to have some things in common with the above.  They’re using a
Goertzel oscillator in their PLL, but it isn’t the oscillator; it’s in
the feedback path between the oscillator and the phase detector.
They’re also using a moving-average filter (a box filter).  Moreover,
they’re using a PI controller in the loop to set the oscillator
frequency in order to drive the phase error to zero (since their
application is power grid synchronization), rather than the
proportional control I used in the example above.  As far as I can
tell, by “SGDFT” they just mean the Goertzel algorithm.

I haven’t found anybody talking about the relationship between the
Goertzel algorithm and the Minsky algorithm, about using prefix sums
to get variable tradeoffs between precision in the frequency domain
and in the time domain without having to redo the multiplications,
about using the Goertzel or Minsky algorithm as a combination
phase-detector and oscillator in a PLL, or about the fortuitously
nearly-A440 Goertzel frequencies we get with just a bit shift.  I've
never seen anybody talk about doing the Goertzel algorithm in wrapping
integer math to avoid roundoff error (though, admittedly, it probably
only makes sense in the context of Hogenauer-style windowing).  I've
never seen a discussion of using the Goertzel algorithm to detect a
frequency *near* the target frequency and precisely identify it by
unwrapping the phase.  But it’s possible that that’s just because I’m
just not that familiar with the literature.  Or that the ideas are
wrong.

However, all the PLL and Minsky-algorithm and Goertzel-algorithm stuff
is very well known.