I thought I'd try out GPT-2's abilities at generating some
adjective-heavy descriptive prose, using [Talk To
Transformer](https://talktotransformer.com/).

I think this kind of thing could be dangerous for humans with an
inclination towards psychosis; they could easily start to think these
texts were messages for them from God or demons or the CIA or
something.  Even humans not prone to psychosis are vulnerable to the
Eliza Effect, where by pareidolia they read all kinds of meaning into
any text with even the slightest semblance of coherence.  And this
text has more than the slightest semblance.

Yawning in the echoing forest
-----------------------------

My prompt:

> As the red sun rose over the mists of the echoing forest, I awoke to
  a spiderweb sparkling in the fog, yawned and stretched, and smelled
  the musty-sweet smell of the bog.

GPT-2 completions:

1. I yawned again and stretched, and ate breakfast. I ate a little
more, and yawned some more. I was very hungry, but I couldn't figure
out what my new surroundings were, except that there were new memories
that I didn't want to lose. After lunch I walked down into the bog,
pulling my shoes onto my feet and shivering.

2. It reminded me of hot stewed serpents and sweet jellies and it
terrified me, like at any moment I might step onto wits one of those
monsters of my dreams and get jolted like Milla Jovovich.  I emerged
from the forest, using a talisman to summon my trusty Glaive. The

3. Like a cheap copy of Gray's Anatomy, a billowing furry body yawned
"I love you", it said in my ear. I woke again, and gazed at the black
waters of the Old River. "You're still here", I croaked, and let a
limp hand break free of my splintered wrist. "Don

4. I crawled to the wick of the bulbous flame, snuffed it out, and
 brought it to the campfire.  [hippies including Wes Craven!  Craven
 doesn't actually use the term "personas", the last thing I want to do
 is abuse a trend in film criticism that some people cherish.  "Person

5. When I remembered this I laughed, and took a moment to look
around. Only one person on the park had been sleeping that night, a
slim man with a thin mustache and a big purple head, who had not
attended to his own business but was watching me with that perplexed
look of his.

    "I sleep

Well, that's interesting.  Sleepy amnesiac exploring nature; terror
fantasy; extreme furry S&M porn; film criticism, and some kind of
creepy sci-fi.

Trumpet flower moths in the night
---------------------------------

My prompt:

> The trumpet flowers opened at dusk and released their intoxicating
  scent, drawing giant clearwing moths from near and far, who
  fluttered like doves as they came to sip the sweet nectar.

GPT-2 completions:

1. A stormy sky blanketed the land, thick with thunder and lightning.
A sea of rubble had amassed where the town of Mazarkis had
nodded in unison. A massive oak tower had caught the lightning that
struck the town and released sparks that cut the air like torches.
"It is here," the rain outside his window

2. Until the lights were gone, the guards seemed to sit there for hours    
On the smooth-skating marble atrium, chattering idly in their    
Pause one, out of sight, as if just as anxious to get back to their    
Equipment as to allow happy times for themselves.    
At noon, another guard came by with a bou

3. They would land and start up the sky lane a few times in an hour,
or perhaps take a nap. While women in my family were the avid bakers,
the fondness of my father for stone roasted, braised and popcorn tofu
grilled chicken barbecue johndoes not even begin to cover what a
goddamn delight he found each of these

4. The night continued to be dark and bright. About that time the
   sound of water from a well almost drowned us all. Ten feet down the
   cave was a basin, in which two men and two women were bathing.

    But I wondered why they were there, and found it very puzzling. We
    were none of us dumb enough to

5. The birds were gone by daybreak, and the scent they left was said
to be iridescent in the cold morning air. When the night arrived, the
blossoms burst out into the night sky, reaching skyward for a few
moments before lowering on either side. By the time dawn emerged, most
of the blossoms had withered into black globes

Again, a great variety: a suspenseful fantasy scene (what happened to
the town of Mazarkis?  Did the lightning reduce it to rubble?), poetry
about guards on (?) an atrium, weird family cooking recollections,
some kind of group adventure story, rapid cycling of dark and light
with "iridescent scent".  I love it!  It's better than a cut-up!

Boca Juniors celebration
------------------------

My prompt:

> Safe within my massive artificial mountain of glued-together pebbles
  and sand, I listened to the wild festivities celebrating our victory
  over Boca Juniors without, as the revelers danced in the streets and
  beat their wild drums.

GPT-2 completions:

1. But I was too saddened by our defeat for this. I too was beat down
by feelings of regret and remorse that no-one, not even George Ross,
could stop from allowing it to happen. Why? Because he knew, without a
doubt, that there was always an impossible task

2. Not to be outdone, the team took to the field to advance the story
of the year by beating Santos on match day and earning the franchise's
first win over the most hated team in Liga MX. After a rematch,
Montagliani presented us with the trophy, giving his team the trophy

3. So I lay back, relaxing and savoring the moment.  The lovely
    Filipino lady came in behind me and as she rubbed my shoulders I
    began to lighten up a little.

    She drew my hand towards her breasts and kissed me like I had
    never been kissed before and she wanted

4. My sun-kissed skin flowed in waves along my pebbled thighs as I

5. What a war these factions have fought for a week.  Boca Juniors, I
fear not their armies, nor their luck, nor their rich coffers, but
what would a victorious opponent for them? Would they tolerate our
spirit, our style of play, and our joy of life? Surely no

This is hilarious!  A tortured self-reflection, sports nonsense,
regular porn, very weird but short porn, and some kind of political
agitprop against a soccer team.

Swordfight scene
----------------

My prompt:

> Gray struck him again, harder, with the edge of his shining
  scimitar, but the Mazarkin's armor held.  With a great cry, he leapt
  into the air and kicked at Gray's head, but Gray had already ducked,
  and as the other landed on his feet, Gray whirled to face him,
  battered shield up.

GPT-2 completions:

1.  "Better protect my lord!" he shouted, "If you kill me, your queen
dies!" To Gray's surprise, Brown's face went white, and his spear
dropped. The elves

2. Gray only had his blade at his side. "I'm through with you,
    Garro ! "

    "No," says Garro, looking up at Gray with eyes hard as stones. "

3. It took half a dozen blows before Gray was soundly knocked to the
ground.  Once on the ground, Gray saw that the Mazarkin had seemingly
dodged everything he could think

4. "You! A coward. You must have been blind, talking Your Grace. But
not brave. A coward. You cannot give up so easily.  This will make you
strong."

5. With one hand, he banged the edge of the shield upon Gray's head
again, causing blood to come spilling from the wound.  Then he lifted
his great sword again and

So, pretty consistent in that they're all continuations of the fight
scene, but several are dialogue, and one has elves.  They're shorter
than the earlier continuations and thus less interesting, which I
think is a limitation of the Talk To Transformer site.

Vampire predation
-----------------

My prompt:

> As her hot blood filled my mouth, she trembled in helpless
  delight. I felt her fiery life filling my veins, dispelling for a
  little while my ghostly pallor, as I held her delicate form firmly

1. in my arms. I swallowed my hard-earned seed. I was still feeling
    pretty drained when she finally came down from her thrilling, and
    very intense, release.

    When I had finally finally calmed down, I sat back and looked at
    what I had just accomplished. Her delicate flesh was bulging from
    her shapeless suit. Even the crisp dressing on her soft flesh was

2. by my dainty hands. I willed her to fall into deep sleep, and so
drove her to all her. Lips, and to her great desires.

    I willed all in me now to throw my strength into renewing this
    last struggle, even that I might not fail to make her submit to my
    advances. Soon, the heavy suck

3. in my arms.

    "Haah, I'm getting too old for this now."

    "Do not be, the life energy is a nourishment that is best given
    when married. However, because we married earlier, we would need
    to make it look like our love is growing as if it were a flower
    that you throw out into the wind. With this, we

4. in my embrace. With a tongue as rough as the hungry pit on her
throat, my lips caressed her beautiful jade-cut lips, and softly
nibbled her hard tender nips. Turning her head to face me, she
whispered: "You have captured my spirit, and I am yours forever."

    To read part one of our story click here. To read part

5. in my arms.

    My hands had been in rough contact with her soft and delicate
    torso, and I could feel a pair of soft yet firm buttocks growing
    between my fingers. With no other thought than that she needed
    what I wanted, I guided my now numb

Okay, so, normal if somewhat surreal porn, incoherent vampire story,
more coherent vampire story, romantic porn with links, and very weird
porn that I actually cut off here because it got more sexually
explicit than I want to include here.  "Firm buttocks growing between
my fingers" is a very surreal image.

An agony of grief
-----------------

My prompt:

> I crumpled to the ground in agony.  "Why?" I asked.  "Why him?  Why
  now?"  Suddenly knowing I would never again in my life see his dear,
  sweet face, never again touch his cheek, filled my chest with
  an unbearable tightness.

GPT-2 completions:

1. "Why?" "What can it mean?" "Do you know how I hate you, O God?"
"Then answer me. And she has been here, who knows not, never seen the
place? "Oh, Christ

2. I cried aloud, weeping with all my yet unearthly force, as though
my heart had been broken, my blood were I heard some one moaning,
muffled somewhere deep in the woods, the roar of an unknown beast.  N

3.  I ran back to the big tree and tried to put out the fire. I had to
wash my face before I could get a word out. Even the pebbles in my
face and from the tree trail made my arm ac

4.  "Why this at last ?" I mumbled. "Why, what's the matter?" One
minute. . . . . . and then. "Shame on the hotel!" It was 9:30
P.M. Why? Why

5. My palms had been moistened and my cheeks throbbed when I touched
him, but this new feeling struck me too and all my physical and
psychological strength fled. As he passed, I went to one corner of the
room and sat quietly

This one is harder.  Emotionally, I mean.  The first is some kind of
bargaining with a very interactive sort of God; the second continues
in the theme of grief and weeping ("cried aloud" would have been
better than "asked" in my prompt, I think); the third is some kind of
emergency response; the fourth is incongruously pedestrian; and the
fifth is about accompanying a loved one in their death.

FOREST NEEDS MOAR MODIFIERS
---------------------------

My prompt:

> The ancient, verdant forest sighed sweetly and fragrantly in the
  warm, soft breeze.  Excitable young bluebirds flitted brightly
  between the thick, secretly radioactive branches,

GPT-2 completions:

1. happily humming their song and laughing as they threw confetti into
the air. The hum was barely noticeable to her; her already radiant
mood greatly improved. The towering cypress trees looked grand in the
background of the sparkling white lakes and sparkling white waters.

    'Beautiful, isn't it? Wonderful!'

    'Oh, this is just like our precious home.'

    'Our home

2. poking and pecking each other, and eyeing the red-headed teacher
    intently. It was a moment of peace before all hell broke loose...

    The Vermilion Girls: Softly Sharp Knives of Laughter

    From the Sword Art Online anime is currently airing a one-shot
    manga, and by my count there is at least 6 different chapters in
    this series. In each volume,

3.  their vibrant, brilliant blue feathers just as bright as those of
a current-day hummingbird. It was like one long day spent reading a
long, windy passage of literature, or smelling a powerful perfume.

    What-what-what-what? Sniffle.

    'Waaaaaaaah'

    As if somehow overcome by pleasure and a lingering sense of
    despair, Erin

4.  a new specimen emerging from the shadows and spying on me. I
approached the bird and gave a quick squawk. "Hah, alert! You're too
early. A feeder came by just before the first meal!" I was almost
there. "Ugh, sorry." "You won't catch a feeder there." "Uh-huh. Not
any time

5. and those who weren't looking for secrets quickly went in to the
forest in a hurry. After searching through dozens of trees and
examining their contents, they finally realized something: it was a
lockpick.

    How to hide a lockpick? It was easy, the trees did not have to be
    smothered with soot and they did not need to be cut down to have
    easy access to the

This was an experiment in going overboard on adjectives and adverbs,
and in some cases it was successfully transferred to the output, to
the point of self-parody at times; "the sparkling white lakes and
sparkling white waters," really?

The first is some kind of party-nostalgic scene (bluebirds throwing
confetti!); the second one is some kind of blurb for a lesbian porn
manga or something (whose awesome title is original); the third one is
some kind of fiction but I don't know what; the fourth has
anthropomorphic birds seeking "feeders"; and the fifth is some kind of
demented adventure.

No modifiers, just a helicopter
-------------------------------

My prompt:

> Rayentray slid through the door half a second before it slammed,
  belting herself into the helicopter's copilot seat.  "Ready!" she
  grinned, as the blades deafened the neighborhood and they began to
  rise.

GPT-2 completions:

1. Angie shuddered and slammed the door shut behind them, as the
primary ignition roared to life. The helicopter's mated engines roared
to life, as the aircraft soared above the rooftops. The two pilots,
each carrying one M107 Thunderchief heavy machine gun, looked down

2. "Well, I'm expecting lots of calling, but no need to hurry. It will
be taken care of. I could be here any minute. Come on!"  Right at the
moment their throats were becoming over-taxed, Sabertooth I stepped
into view through the door,

3. "We're a military-transport aircraft, and I'll get into any a
simulation where I can beat you any time!" she laughed.  Soon, the
aircraft had climbed so high in the sky, the top-shelf F-111s that
were based at Roswell with their Predator-2s were unable

4. she spoke into the radio. "Crew elevator deck 703, VCHADE 703,
emergency closing."

    She flipped the switch and as they hurtled upwards the top canopy
    opened, revealing a woman with pigtails and a headband.

    "Shall we do this?" Judy smiled, gripping her pistol tighter

5. "You want to stop? Here we come."

    The exterior walls of the home were immaculately maintained. The
    interior might as well have been a spaceship. The home belonged to
    Georgette and her small brood, who lived out their afternoons in
    comfort, ignorance and opulence. It was

So, lots of military stuff; an interesting thing is that three other
characters appear, and all three are also women, like Rayentray.
Unless Sabertooth is a person.

The fake military terms are really impressive.  The "M107 Thunderchief
heavy machine gun" sounds so convincing you'd think it must have been
lifted wholesale from somewhere, but in fact the M107 is a sniper
rifle, one person can't carry a heavy machine gun, and the
Thunderchief was a US fighter-bomber aircraft.  Similarly, the F-111
was retired in 1998, before the Predator really entered use, and the
Predator-2 is a handheld toy quadcopter; you wouldn't use either a
Predator or a Predator 2 with an F-111 even if they were in service at
the same time.

This was an experiment in going to the other extreme: *no* adjectives
or adverbs (except, I guess, "copilot seat" uses "copilot" as an
adjective).  To compensate, I tried to channel my inner thesaurus,
Tom-Swifting things a bit.

\#2 is pretty incoherent.

Invented Wikipedia articles
---------------------------

The Arbëreshë are a real people, Albanians who settled in Italy
several centuries ago, but essentially everything GPT-2 says about
them is false.  They generally belong to the Orthodox Christian
Church.

My prompt:

> [ edit ]
>
> Religiously, most Arbëreshë belong to

GPT-2 completes:

1. the Church of the 'Everlasting God' (Qanat, a god eternally active,
and the offspring of all other gods). Indeed, they consider the Dark
Lord of the universe to be a reincarnation of the god(s) originally at
war with Elantris and are constantly warning others to stop him. Their
dread of the Mortal World greatly offsets their obsession with magic,
which often turns them astray and warps their thinking. They don't
fear death, even at the hands of

2. the Church of Sarben, which has its headquarters in Anarres. The
belief in the omnipotence and total justice of the Gods and Goddesses
is generally the basis of most Arbëreshë beliefs, which sometimes come
to the fore in disputes or personal conflicts. Even if one does not
follow any specific religion, Arbëreshë still consider themselves to
be descendants of the gods and goddesses of their forefathers. For
example, Velyar 'cause it is his beloved

3. several different Indo-European groups (see
Wikipedia:Indo-European), with Ashirasë, the highest, being associated
with the Nordics (see Norse, Bulgars).

    In their position of the highest divine state, the Shaidar-i-Asrar
    or Shaidar-i-Ištar were historically known as the primary divine
    of all the Arbëshes, and the more exalted of the divine-favored
    inhabitants of the world. Ashiras

4. the Old Fëan religion. Most have strong ties to Athelâr, and it is
through that religion that most Arbëreshë worship and take their
oaths. There are some more distant Arbëreshë, especially those who
worship other deities, who do not belong to a single religion. It is
rare, however, for Arbëreshë to do so without also taking an oath from
them.[1][2]

    Some Arbëreshë form their

5. a tradition that dates back to the founding of the city by Tulu
(also called Tulu-túru) in the year 498 Eru. Since that time, it has
flourished, but still today the chief religion is still that of
Tulu-túru. During the present times it was preached, practiced, and
followed by most people in the region, who consider the church to be
the ancestor of the current Tulu-túru, and especially its priests and
lector

I think the first of these is wonderfully creative: a god that is the
*offspring* of all the other gods.  The second refers to Anarres, the
fictional impoverished anarchist moon in Le Guin's _The Dispossessed_.