So I was thinking about what’s needed to make a GUI library.  You can
get a substantial amount of it out of this piece of `propfont.c`:

    /* This is sort of like a two-dimensional, dynamically-typed pointer
     * into pixels.
     */
    typedef struct {
      char *pixels;
      int pixel_bytes, line_stride;
    } pixel_buf;

    static inline char *index_pixbuf(pixel_buf buf, int x, int y) {
      return buf.pixels + y * buf.line_stride + x * buf.pixel_bytes;
    }

    static inline pixel_buf offset_pixbuf(pixel_buf buf, int dx, int dy) {
      pixel_buf result = {
        index_pixbuf(buf, dx, dy),
        buf.pixel_bytes,
        buf.line_stride,
      };

      return result;
    }

    static inline void fill_pixbuf(pixel_buf buf, char *ink, int w, int h) {
      for (int x = 0; x < w; x++) {
        memcpy(index_pixbuf(buf, x, 0), ink, buf.pixel_bytes);
      }

      for (int y = 0; y < h; y++) {
        memcpy(index_pixbuf(buf, 0, y), index_pixbuf(buf, 0, 0), w * buf.pixel_bytes);
      }
    }

That doesn’t give you clipping, but with those 23 lines of code, any
function that takes a `pixel_buf` parameter can be persuaded to draw
at any position on a BIP pixel buffer of the pixel format it’s
expecting.  You could enhance it to track right and bottom edges of
rectangular windows with another couple of lines of code, which would
make `fill_pixbuf` more convenient to call in many cases.  And it’s
going to be pretty efficient.

However, if you write a windowing system on top of primitives like
these, whether structured-mode or immediate-mode, you are probably
going to end up with a kind of 1980s-looking window system with no
antialiasing or transparency that’s entirely immune to hardware
acceleration, although if you avoid overdraw, you might be able to
manage reasonable frame rates anyway.  Nowadays, we can do better!

Modern GUIs have transparency (alpha), gradients, rotation and
distortion, filtering, béziers, antialiasing, animation, and terrible
performance.  I think we can do better.

First, both 1980s and modern GUIs almost entirely lack texture.  But
texture is a ubiquitous attribute of actual physical objects, and
serves to orient us to movement in a subtle way.  It also has a
tendency to reduce the visual impact of dirt on the display or RF
interference on the video signal.

Second, both 1980s and modern GUIs are still mostly oriented toward
paraxial rectangles, and don’t have indirect illumination (with the
exception of drop shadows in modern GUIs on text and elevated
windows).  This orientation robs us of a lot of the structural cues
we’re familiar with from the physical world.  They also don’t take
advantage of the possibility of zooming, in part because of font
hinting and slow rasterization.

Third, 1980s GUIs, modern GUIs, and web UIs all lack a great deal
compared to traditional typesetting, from a certain point of view.
They lack letterform variation, columnar layout and horizontal
scrolling, reasonable hyphenation and justification, hanging
punctuation, tactile interface, line width variation, and so on.  Of
course, they’re dramatically better from other points of view: better
contrast ratios, animation, interactivity, undo, generativity, and so
on.

There’s an additional, somewhat selfish question associated with all
of this, which is that if you reimplement the standard WIMP interface,
it’s easy for people who see it to dismiss it as unoriginal or even a
copy of existing software with the labels filed off.  (Many internet
commenters carelessly dismissed Biyubi Fénix as a knockoff of
KolibriOS/Menuet, for example, apparently without looking at it.)  So
even if you can’t do something *better*, doing something *different*
is significant.

So what might that look like?

I frequently hear surprised noises when I turn on my computer with a
full-screen shell window.  Old people sometimes mistake it for MS-DOS,
but young adults were born around 1995, after MS-DOS was already
obsolete.  Here in Argentina, many of them didn’t even use computers
until after 2000.

Most people have still never seen a ZUI (with the possible exception
of Prezi), and so simple “infinite” zooming is one way to distinguish
it.  It also lends itself to animations easily, which is in fact part
of Prezi’s appeal.

Windowing systems (and the underlying VT100 emulation) are a poor fit
for shell commands; you have the tendency to open new windows to run
new commands before the old one is done, but then it’s hard to find
the old one.  A sort of notebook interface would work better, where
you always immediately get a new prompt, and the output for previous
commands can expand *above* your current prompt; perhaps it should be
truncated by default, like with a dynamic `head; tail` that also
outputs `wc`.  (If it gets too large, you might want to either block
the process generating it or discard parts of it.)  Then you can also
take that data and feed it to a new process, without having to
re-execute the old one.

Furthermore, in many cases alternate presentations are possible:
numeric tables, barcharts, scatterplots; Bret Victor’s work with Dan
Amelang has shown some of the possibilities of this kind of
visualization, along with incremental dataflow tracing.