I was thinking about synthesizing drum loops and it occurred to me
that Hadamard bases might be an interesting way to do it.

A simple approach to synthesizing a drum loop with a single instrument
and up to 8 beats is to just have 16 variables for the volume and
timing offset of each of the 8 beats.  Some of the volumes might be 0,
silencing those beats; some of the offsets might be nonzero, swinging
those beats a bit.

A problem with this representation is that usually you don’t want to
adjust just one beat at a time; you might want to do something to all
the odd beats, for example, or all the even beats.  A possible
solution to this is to transform 8 volume variables and 8
timing-offset variables each through a 8x8 Walsh matrix, here given in
“sequency order” rather than as a Hadamard matrix:

     1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1
     1  1  1  1 -1 -1 -1 -1
     1  1 -1 -1 -1 -1  1  1
     1  1 -1 -1  1  1 -1 -1
     1 -1 -1  1  1 -1 -1  1
     1 -1 -1  1 -1  1  1 -1
     1 -1  1 -1 -1  1 -1  1
     1 -1  1 -1  1 -1  1 -1

Given an appropriate constant scaling factor, this is an orthonormal
basis for 8-vectors.

A more convenient form might be the ReLU of the same matrix, which you
will note is still symmetric though no longer normalized:

     1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1
     1  1  1  1  0  0  0  0
     1  1  0  0  0  0  1  1
     1  1  0  0  1  1  0  0
     1  0  0  1  1  0  0  1
     1  0  0  1  0  1  1  0
     1  0  1  0  0  1  0  1
     1  0  1  0  1  0  1  0

So, for example with volumes, the first variable is a master volume
control; the last variable is a master volume control for the major
beats (assuming we’re in 4/4 time); the second variable controls the
volume on the first half of the measure; the fourth variable controls
the first and third beats (the “on” beats, giving you a backbeat if
you turn them down); the fifth variable controls the first halves of
the first and third beats, and the second halves of the second and
fourth beats; and so on.  It might make the most sense to have scale
values that extend from zero amplitude to somewhere above 1.0, but do
the matrix-multiply in decibels, so any single slider is capable of
silencing either half or all the beats, and can either attenuate or
amplify those beats from the overall reference volume level.

In this way you can adjust the volumes of the 8 beats to any desired
combination of volumes, but every slider affects half the beats in
what I speculate will be a more musically appealing way.

The same scheme can be used for adjusting timing, though perhaps there
is no need for the first variable in that case.  If the last timing
variable (10101010) is pushed to an extreme, it could perhaps push the
eighth notes to coincide with the quarter notes.

Here’s the corresponding 4x4 binary matrix:

    1 1 1 1
    1 1 0 0
    1 0 0 1
    1 0 1 0

And the corresponding 16x16 binary matrix:

    1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
    1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
    1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1
    1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0
    1 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 1
    1 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 1 1 1 0 0
    1 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 1
    1 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 1 0 0
    1 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 1
    1 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 0 1 1 0 0 1 1 0
    1 0 0 1 0 1 1 0 0 1 1 0 1 0 0 1
    1 0 0 1 0 1 1 0 1 0 0 1 0 1 1 0
    1 0 1 0 0 1 0 1 1 0 1 0 0 1 0 1
    1 0 1 0 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 1 0 1 0
    1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1
    1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0

This was derived as follows:

    def hadamard(n):
        return ([[1]] if n < 1 else
                [xs + xs               for xs in hadamard(n-1)] +
                [xs + [-x for x in xs] for xs in hadamard(n-1)])

    def walsh(n):
        return sorted(hadamard(n),
            key=lambda xs: sum(1 for i in range(1, len(xs))
                               if xs[i] != xs[i-1]))

    def walsh_order(n):  # bit-reversed reflected binary Gray code
        return ([0] if n < 1 else
                [x * 2     for x in          walsh_order(n-1) ] +
                [x * 2 + 1 for x in reversed(walsh_order(n-1))])

    def binrow(row):
        return ('1' if x > 0 else '0' for x in row)

    if __name__ == '__main__':
        for row in walsh(4):
            print(' '.join(binrow(row)))

It is possible to use the fast Hadamard transform to efficiently
transform between the two representations — the set of user
parameters and the set of music parameters — but that isn’t really
important in this case.
