Hearing aids for disability compensation, protection, and augmentation
======================================================================

I want a hackable hearing aid for three reasons: disability
compensation, protection, and augmentation.  I was hoping to get one
this year, but that seems unlikely now.

Disability compensation
-----------------------

This body is considerably more sensitive to strong stimuli than
average human bodies, due to a syndrome known as autism.  Sounds such
as a pneumatic cylinder opening a bus door or a whistle during
applause cause it acute pain, though that pain fades immediately — the
main difference from the pain of, for example, barking one’s shins on
a pipe.  Moreover, continued stimulation at a lower level, such as the
traffic noise outside the window, cause continued low-level stress.

Earplugs mechanically block high-frequency sounds, reaching
attenuations of some 30 dB above around 200–400 Hz, but they are
helpless against sounds below 100 Hz.  Complementarily,
noise-canceling headphones like the Bose QuietComfort 25 can attenuate
low-frequency sounds by some 30 dB by generating cancelation waves,
but this benefit starts to roll off above some 100 Hz.

A hearing aid with noise-cancelation firmware offers both benefits at
once, and has the major benefit that it is socially acceptable; the
other humans will tolerate it considerably better than they will
tolerate a human wearing earplugs or headphones during a conversation.
Also, they can offer customizable nonlinear and time-variable
attenuation curve, for example performing no attenuation while sound
levels are under 60 dBa.

Hearing-aid earmolds are also safe and comfortable to wear for many
hours a day, while disposable earplugs tend to cause irritation and
even pain after more than an hour or three.

Protection
----------

Aside from the pure pain, loud noises can also cause ear damage, and
in the same way that earplugs and noise-cancelation headphones can
prevent pain, they can also prevent damage.

Augmentation
------------

A hearing aid with wireless communication can provide a private audio
output channel from personal computers (pocket and otherwise), for
example to provide alerts, reminders, or query results.  Furthermore,
it can also provide a private audio *input* channel to personal pocket
computers, since it has a microphone; use as a substitute for Bell’s
Telephone is one possibility.  Autonomous computing operation,
including peer-to-peer Bluetooth communication, is another whole class
of potential uses.

As discussed in file `bokeh-pointcasting`, a private bidirectional
communication channel to an external computing resource can, under
some circumstances, save your life — the case considered there was
sounding an alarm during armed home invasion.

Cocktail-party beamforming, perhaps using a chest-mounted microphone
array, might enable this body to participate in social events it is
currently excluded from, due to its inability to understand anything
anyone is saying.

With ultrasound-capable microphones, simple heterodyning software
could make bat calls audible.  Other forms of “extrasensory
perception” are implementable: detection of magnetic fields, electric
fields, radio waves, carbon monoxide, anoxic atmospheres, objects such
as motorcyclists rapidly approaching from behind, and so on.

Such intimate integration of a computer into a human life demands
extreme caution about privacy and computer security problems, given
the deplorable state of human computer security.

All of this is limited by battery considerations, though perhaps a
flat-flex cable from the hearing aid taped to the back of the neck
with flesh-colored tape could provide access to a much larger battery
in, say, a pocket; energy-harvesting antennas may also be an option.
