Some plastics, such as 6/6 nylon, are so resistant to abrasion that it
is very difficult to machine them, but have very low viscosity once
melted.  You can cut nylon with an abrasive wheel, for example, but it
destroys the wheel.  Acetal (that is, polyoxymethylene or POM, aka
Delrin) is popular not primarily because of its material
properties — although they are quite good — but because it can be cut
much more easily than most other thermoplastics.

Plastic foams such as Styrofoam can be cut using a hot wire, typically
stainless steel, but this approach doesn’t work for solid plastics;
the molten plastic closes up the kerf behind the wire.  Hot-wire
cutting also typically suffers from poor temperature control,
vaporizing and burning some of the plastic, which increases the risk
of hazardous fumes.

Suppose that instead you had a narrow steel or aluminum pipe, for
example 8 mm diameter with 0.5-mm-thick walls, heated to a precisely
controlled temperature by pumping heated oil through it.  The oil
could, for example, be heated to 290° and pumped around a closed loop
past an electrically heated aluminum heatsink, with the heat applied
to the heatsink controlled by a thermostat measuring the temperature
of the output oil.  With this approach, most of the molten nylon can
be made to run out of the kerf as the pipe advances through it,
particularly if the nylon material is in a sheet of only a few
millimeters thickness.

If we take 45–45 cal/g (188 kJ/kg) to be the heat of fusion — a bit
less than that of paraffin — 271° to be the final melting point, and
1.21 g/cc to be the density of 6/6 nylon, from [Starkweather, Noller,
and Jones 1984][0] then melting a 9 mm kerf through a 20 mm thickness
of nylon would require 41 J/mm to do just the melting.  If we believe
[Engineering Toolbox’s specific heat table][1], the heat capacity is
1.7 kJ/kg/K, so heating by 250 K is another 425 kJ/kg, for a total of
613 kJ/kg.  This means that same 9 mm kerf at 20 mm thickness requires
135 J/mm.  So cutting at a reasonable speed of 10 mm/s, neglecting
conduction, requires 1300 W.  Cutting at higher powers is more
efficient, because you'll get a smaller error from neglecting
conduction.

[0]: http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/pol.1984.180220905/abstract
[1]: http://www.engineeringtoolbox.com/specific-heat-capacity-d_391.html

Polyvinyl chloride is another example of a plastic that can be easily
cut with a hot object, but is hazardous with poor temperature control.
If we believe [the Polymer Science Learning Center’s decomposition
temperature table][3], PVC decomposes in the 200°–300° range but
doesn’t melt until 265°, and nylon 6,6 decomposes in the 310°–380°
range, while PET melts at 268° and decomposes in the 283°–306° range.

[3]: http://pslc.ws/fire/howwhy/thermalp.htm

Transferring 1500 W to oil through a heatsink probably requires a
heatsink of some 100 mℓ capacity, so the total amount of oil needed
for this tool is probably around 150 mℓ.

Avocado oil has a smoke point of 270°, which is probably high enough
to melt nylon, but more normal cooking oils like soybean oil smoke at
much lower temperatures like 238°.  This suggests that if a nontoxic
oil is to be used in this tool, it has to be medical-grade paraffin or
polydimethylsiloxane rather than any actually edible oil.  I’m not
certain that either of these, but especially medical-grade paraffin,
will withstand such high temperatures; [Engineering Toolbox
suggests][5] a limit of 149° for mineral oil and 260° for PDMS or
other silicones, but I suspect that may just be the point where the
oil ceases to lubricate.  Some companies do sell [high-temperature
lubricants][7] capable of lubricant use up to 270° and more; the
fluorinated [Krytox XHT][8] supposedly doesn’t degrade until 350° and
doesn't corrode metals until 288°.

[5]: http://www.engineeringtoolbox.com/oil-temperature-limits-lubrication-d_1492.html
[7]: http://www.moresco.co.jp/en/products/high-temperature-grease#sub-01
[8]: https://www.chemours.com/Lubricants/en_US/applications/Extreme_Temperatures.html

If the oil is heated to 290° and must not cool below 271°, we only
have 19 K of sensible heat in which to store all the heat to be
delivered to the nylon.  If the oil has a heat capacity of
1.67 kJ/kg/K (according to [Engineering Toolbox's table][2]), that's
only 32 kJ/kg, so we need 47 g/s of flow.  At 0.8 g/cc, that’s
59 mℓ/s.  If a single-acting piston pump driven at 1500 rpm is driving
this, the pump’s displacement needs to be 2.35 cc.

In a 7-mm-diameter pipe, that’s a rather shocking 1.5 m/s average
linear speed.  The Reynolds number is almost 11000.  But according to
an [anonymous online calculator][4], the pressure drop from 200 mm of
such a flow with .01 mm pipe roughness, if the fluid were water, would
be only 11 mbar (1.1 kPa).  This implies that only 65 mW of pumping
power is needed, which seems surprisingly small to me, suggesting that
maybe my pipe resistance calculation is wrong.  [Another random online
calculator][6] suggests that the head loss will be 294 mm, which would
be 2.9 kPa, which is a little higher but still in the ballpark.

[2]: http://www.engineeringtoolbox.com/specific-heat-fluids-d_151.html
[4]: http://www.pressure-drop.com/Online-Calculator/
[6]: http://www.calculatoredge.com/mech/pipe%20friction.htm

These high powers suggest that it might be desirable to power the tool
directly with fire rather than electrically.

Alternative heat transfer fluids might include perfluorocarbons (like
the Krytox XHT mentioned earlier), molten salts, and molten metals.

In particular, ordinary tin-lead 63/37 solder melts at 183°, doesn’t
boil until 1500°, and doesn’t suffer chemical breakdown.

It does tend to dissolve metals — tin quite rapidly, of course, but
also gold, silver, and copper at significant speeds, and even nickel
some 25 times slower than copper.  In the case of copper, the
dissolution diminishes rapidly once the solder is saturated with
dissolved copper (at a fairly low level), as is done in SAVBIT solder.
Presumably this also applies to other metals it can dissolve, too.
People add nickel to solder to keep it from dissolving iron.
Phosphorus counteracts this effect and increases stainless steel
erosion — in lead-free tin-copper solder.

There’s debate about whether tin-lead solder is capable of even
*joining* steel, which I thought might imply that it has a very hard
time *dissolving* steel as well.  Other alloys (lead-silver, cadmium-
silver, tin-silver, and maybe tin-bismuth) supposedly work well for
joining steel.  But apparently tin-lead solder does work with steel if
you use acid flux.

Molten solder in wave-soldering equipment is normally contained in
stainless-steel equipment, which suffers erosion over a period of
months, but this is at lower temperatures than what I'm discussing
here.  One study I found, though, found about 0.25 mm erosion depth on
stainless steel 304 (and a bit less on 316) after 384 hours in a 350°
lead-free solder, which seems slow enough that the tool could still be
useful.

Type metal is a variant that has the desirable property that it
doesn’t have a sudden change in volume when it melts.  It's a tin-lead
solder that also includes antimony; the traditional composition is 18%
tin, 28% antimony, 54% lead, while the eutectic is 4% tin, 12%
antimony, 84% lead, which melts at 240°.  (Elemental antimony is
fairly nontoxic, although its compounds are deadly, and its fumes are
bad for you too.)  Legend has it that type metal is very poor at
dissolving iron.

Scrap type metal from Linotypes and the like is available on
MercadoLibre at AR$55/kg (US$3.60/kg).

If using a coolant that melts above room temperature, then to keep the
machine from freezing solid permanently the first time you turn it
off, you could thread a resistance heating element all the way through
the pipe, probably with insulation around it.  That way, when you turn
the element on, it will melt a path around it through the tube,
allowing the coolant to begin to flow.
