It’s 2028.  Last year, you visited your mother in a nursing home and
sat with her and talked for a long time, which was sometimes
difficult, because one of the other residents was listening to music
on the radio on the other side of a curtain.  You video-recorded the
whole session and stored it on your computer.  You told her you’d come
back to visit the next week, but trouble came up at work, and you had
to postpone the visit for another week.  On your next visit, she no
longer recognized you.  A few weeks later, she died.  Now your
computer has flagged your video as copyright infringement and deleted
it because of the music in the background.  You would like to make
sure this doesn’t happen again.

Your brother stored a copy of your last recording of your mother
before she died on Dropbox, but Dropbox also flagged it as copyright
infringement and deleted it.  After he protested publicly, Dropbox
reported him to the police for child pornography, and indeed the
police found child porn videos were in his Dropbox folder when they
seized his computer.  He swears he didn’t put them there, but he’s not
having good luck convincing his cellmates of that.  You would like to
make sure you don’t entrust companies like Dropbox with the ability to
plant incriminating files on your computer.

Ever since you watched a video on YouTube about spearfishing off the
coast of Panama, every web site you visit shows you ads for ammunition
and “paracord”, whatever that is.  Your request for a visa to visit
your sister in Spain is declined; no reason is given.  You realize
that watching videos on YouTube is dangerous.
