In file `dercuano-plotting` I talked about the need for a linguistic
model of describing calculations to plot, that is, a programming
language.  I think the ideas I'm describing here are finally
crystallizing, but I wrote about them previously in file `typed-apl`,
file `principled-apl`, file `relational-modeling-and-apl`; additional
sources of inspiration have been file `micro-math-plus`, the ZIMPL and
GNU MathProg languages discussed in file
`linear-optimization-landscape`, Adam N. Rosenberg's "A Description of
One Programmer's Programming Style", and Darius Bacon.

I'm pretty sure I'll have to rework some of this, but I feel like at
this point I have not only something implementable but also a concrete
use case where I can see how the existing designs are suboptimal.

The basic idea is that every expression evaluates not to an atomic
value like 37 or 2.5 but to (looking at it in five different ways) a
table or an array or an N-ary relation or conditional or function; and
the particular atomic values we get out of it depend on the
*circumstances* that obtain when we happen to look at it; and under
some circumstances it may fail to have a value entirely.  We can
inspect these tables to see which circumstances are the relevant ones,
and when the possibilities are finite, we can enumerate all the
possible sets of circumstances and the corresponding atomic values,
which is to say that we can reason counterfactually about what values
the expression *would have had* under circumstances that do not in
fact obtain at the moment.

Even if the possibilities are infinite, by stipulating all the
relevant circumstances, we can reason counterfactually about what
atomic value the expression would have had under those hypothetical
circumstances.

As a very concrete example relevant to my plotting problem, given some
value representing a function *y* that depends on an argument *x*, we
can ask what value *y* would have if *x* were 0, or if *x* were a
member of the list [-1, -0.5, 0, 0.5, 1]; in the latter case, the
result is a finite table of five values that tell us what value *y*
would have for each value of the index into the list.  If *y*
additionally depends on a parameter *p*, we can stipulate that *p*
belongs to some other list, and *y* will provide a potentially larger
table of results.  This provides a strategy for getting good
efficiency out of even a naive interpreter implementation, much like
Numpy, Pandas, APL, Octave, or R; but it should be much easier to
write correct code with, because of the rigorous logical underpinning.

Syntax
------

Because I'm planning to use a non-textual user interface, I'm not
going to design a syntax; instead, I'll just use Lisp S-expression
syntax in this document.  It's not very readable syntax but it's
adequately formal and flexible.  Its execution semantics are not Lisp
execution semantics; it just represents an ordered-tree structure.

Semantic model
--------------

The main objects of interest are atomic values, atomic types,
aggregates, variables, environments, and expressions.  The following
is full of forward references, unfortunately; I should see if there's
a better order to put things in.

### Atomic values ###

Atomic values are things like 4 or -2.5 or 4+1j or :London or possibly
'w'; they correspond to values in many normal programming languages,
but do not include any kind of aggregate data structure such as
arrays, structs, dictionaries, sets, lists, tuples, or ML-style
constructors.  Like quarks, they are never observed alone; they are
always part of an aggregate.  There are different kinds of atomic
values: integers, real numbers, opaque symbols like :London (which I
will write with a leading `:` to distinguish them from variables), and
maybe characters.

### Atomic types ###

XXX confused ideas about what goes here: discrete vs. continuous?
Finite vs. infinite?  Bound vs. unbound?  Bounded vs. unbounded?
Nominal, ordinal, interval, and rational levels of measurement?  Units
of measurement?  Can a single aggregate contain values of different
types?

### Aggregates ###

Aggregates are tables of atomic values, in the sense that they have
rows and columns.  The number of rows may be zero, any natural number,
or infinite; there is always one "result" column, but there can be
zero or more "key" columns.  Each "key" column is associated with a
variable, but the "result" column is not; it is only associated with
the tuple of key-column variable values in its row.  Conceptually
neither rows nor columns have order, although by necessity they will
be in some order when we serialize them.  Aggregates are what
expressions evaluate to, and what environments bind variables to.
Here is an example aggregate:

    (agg      (month oils)
              (1    :VEG1  110)
              (1    :VEG2  120)
              (1    :OIL1  130)
              (2    :VEG1  130))

This aggregate has two key columns, associated with the variables
`month` and `oils`, and four rows, the first of which associates the
atomic value 110 with the situation where the variable `month` has the
atomic value `1` and the variable `oils` has the atomic value :VEG1, a
symbol.  A useful way of reading this is "110 if month == 1 and oils
== :VEG1, else 120 if month == 1 and oils == :VEG2, else 130 if month
== 1 and oils == :OIL1, else 130 if month == 2 and oils == :VEG1."

Here is an aggregate with no key columns, a *constant*, which
associates the atomic value 4 with all possible states of the
universe:

    (agg () 4)

The key columns of an aggregate are its free variables.

XXX Should we remove infinite aggregates?  They are the only way to
represent things like "matrix-vector multiplication" as values, but
they seem significantly different from other kinds of values.

### Variables ###

Variables are opaque, indivisible names, like `x`, `VC`, `month`, or
`oils`.  In themselves they serve only to be distinguished from one
another, but they are crucial links between aggregates, expressions,
environments, and atomic values.

### Environments ###

Environments are sets of key-value pairs in which the keys are
variables and the values are aggregates.  Here is an example
environment:

    (env (month (agg () 1))
         (oils (agg () :VEG1))
         (oilhardness (agg (oils) (:VEG1 8.8) (:VEG2 6.1))))

This associates the variables `month` and `oils` with constant
aggregates and the variable `oilhardness` with an aggregate with two
rows and two columns.  You might think that this second aggregate
contains some extraneous data, describing as it does the `oilhardness`
of a situation that we know is not currently the case (when `oils` is
`:VEG2`), but as we will see, this counterfactual data can be very
useful.

### Expressions ###

Expressions describe computable functions; given some input data, in
the form of an environment, they evaluate to output data, in the form
of an aggregate.  But there are other things we can do with
expressions other than evaluate them; we can query them to find out
what free variables they require in a given environment and what they
require of those free variables.

Here is an example expression:

    (+ (* x y)
       (let (oils (agg () :VEG2)) oilhardness)
       (sum (month) production))

XXX should we require an explicit "in months" in case production fails
to depend on month in a useful way so we don't know what to sum over?
Should there be some kind of explicit or implicit association between
domains and variables, to allow inferring a universe in the absence of
an explicit value?

XXX I'm being a bit fast and loose including an aggregate literal
inside the expression.  I might not want that to be legal.

It has the free variables `x`, `y`, `oilhardness`, `month`, and
`production`, so it cannot be evaluated in an environment without an
aggregate associated with each of these variables.  Also, it may
inherit some free variables from the aggregates associated with those
variables; for example, if `production` is associated with an
aggregate that depends on the variable `city`, then the expression as
a whole also has `city` as a free variable.  However, there are two
binding constructs in this expression, `let` and `sum`, which bind the
variables `oils` and `month` in their respective argument expressions
`oilhardness` and `production`, which prevents those free variables
from bubbling up further.  Indeed, if the expression is evaluated in
an environment that provides values for these free variables, these
binding constructs will prevent those values from penetrating.

This sort of bubbling up is why the set of free variables of an
expression depends on the environment; it amounts to a sneaky sort of
dynamic scoping.  XXX can this dependency be expressed in a usefully
simple way to satisfy the needs of plotting to figure out what kind of
creature it's going to have to plot?

The aggregate that results from evaluating an expression in an
environment has the same set of free variables the expression had in
that environment, and the tuples taken from its key columns will be
some subset of the cross-product of the result columns of the
aggregates supplied for those free variables in that environment.
However, the expression may produce some arbitrary subset of those
rows rather than all of them.

XXX could it be that the expression had free variables that aren't
used?

Expression types
----------------

### Literal aggregates ###

Although I'm not sure if this is the right thing, for the moment I'm
going to allow literal aggregates as expressions.  Moreover, constants
such as 4 and `:VEG1` are also valid; they represent constant
aggregates like `(agg () 4)` and `(agg () :VEG1)`

### Arithmetic ###

The standard set of computer arithmetic operations are provided with
their usual meanings: +, -, \* for multiplication, / for division, %
for remainder, \*\* for exponentiation, >>, <<, abs, exp, ln, pow,
sin, cos, tan, asin, acos, atan, ceil, floor, round, bitand, bitor,
bitnot, and bitxor.  I mean this might change a bit but that's what I
think right now.

These operations take one or more arguments, which are evaluated in
the same environment the arithmetic operation is, and the aggregates
thus produced are passed to the arithmetic operation as actual
parameters.  Their free variables are the union of the free variables
of their operands.

These operations operate purely pointwise and generate a full
Cartesian product output.  In any environment, `(+ 3 4)`, syntactic
sugar for `(+ (agg () 3) (agg () 4))`, will produce `(agg () 7)`.  In
an environment lacking `x`, `(+ (agg (x) (1 3) (2 5)) 4)` will produce
`(agg (x) (1 7) (2 9))`, and

    (+ (agg (x) (1 3) (2 5))
       (agg (x) (1 4) (2 10)))

will produce `(agg (x) (1 7) (2 15))`.  In an environment lacking both
`x` and `y`,

    (+ (agg (x) (1 3) (2 5))
       (agg (y) (:a 4) (:b 10)))

will produce `(agg (x y) (1 :a 7) (1 :b 13) (2 :a 9) (2 :b 15))`.  (At
this point a reminder seems in order that the sequence of rows and
columns in the aggregate is arbitrary and insignificant.)

XXX note that this contradicts the note earlier saying that
expressions could not be evaluated in an environment that didn't
provide aggregates for all their free values.

XXX rename 'aggregate' to 'table'?  It's too long and operations like
"sum" and "min" are usually called "aggregate operations".

The expression `(+ x y)` cannot be evaluated to a finite aggregate if
either `x` or `y` is missing from the environment, but consider the
environment

    (env (x (agg (p) (0 3) (-1 5)))
         (y (agg (q r) (20 30 4))))

in which `(+ x y)` will evaluate to `(agg (p q r) (0 20 30 7) (-1 20
30 9))`, with three free variables bubbling up from the bindings of
`x` and `y`.  If we further augment the environment, we can prevent
`q` from remaining free:

    (env (x (agg (p) (0 3) (-1 5)))
         (y (agg (q r) (20 30 4)))
         (q (agg () 20)))

This causes `(+ x y)` to evaluate to `(agg (p r) (0 30 7) (-1 30 9))`.

It will be seen that an arithmetic expression containing free
variables defines a function taking those variables as arguments.

### `let`-expressions ###

The expression `(let assignments expr)` allows invoking a function
with specific arguments or composing two (or more!) functions.  During
evaluation, it constructs an environment by augmenting its own
evaluation environment with new associations taken from `assignments`,
which is a list of alternating variables and expressions.  These
expressions are evaluated in the outer environment, and each one is
associated with its corresponding variable in the new environment.

The let-expression's free variables are the free variables of `expr`,
minus the variables assigned to in `assignments`, plus the free
variables of the expressions in `assignments`, which might reasonably
add variables back in that were dropped in the second step.

So, for example, `(let (x 3 y 4) (+ x y))` evaluates as before to
`(agg () 7)`, because whatever the outer environment is like, the
inner environment has `x` bound to `(agg () 3)` and `y` bound to `(agg
() 4)`; and it has no free variables.

A more interesting example is `(- x (let (i (- i 1)) x))`.  If `x` has
`i` as a free variable and is defined for `i` integer, the inner `x`
can evaluate to different atomic values from the outer `x`, and you
get the backward differences of `x` along the `i` axis.  (I said at
the top that I wouldn't invent syntax, but if I were inventing syntax,
I might write this as `x - x[i=i-1]`.)

### Conditional expressions ###

The expression `(if x y)` operates very similarly to the arithmetic
expressions, in that its free variables are the union of the free
variables of expression `x` and those of expression `y`, it evaluates
them both in its own environment, and it combines the `x` and `y`
results pointwise.  However, it produces, in general, less than the
full Cartesian product of their results; the rows where `x` produced
false are removed.

So, for example, `(if (> x 1) (if (< x 3) (* x x)))` is the function
*x*<sup>2</sup> limited to the domain (1, 3).

The expression `(case e1 e2 e3 ...)` evaluates all the expressions
`e1`, `e2`, `e3`, etc., in the same environment it was invoked in, but
then combines them in the fashion of SQL's `coalesce` or the `|`
alternation operator in Icon or Unicon: rows are taken from `e2` only
for the case where `e1` did not produce a value, from `e3` only where
`e2` failed, and so on.  This means that you could write the
absolute-value operator, for example, as

    (case (if (> x 0) x)
          (- x))

The first expression produces `x` whenever `x` is greater than 0, but
for x less than or equal to zero, it produces no value, so `case`
fills in the empty space with the result of the `-` operator.

Note that this can be misleading; if you write `(case (if p q) r)`,
even if `p` is always true, that is no guarantee that you will never
see values from `r`, because `q` might fail of its own accord, aside
from getting externally failed by `p`.

(Again, if I were inventing syntax, I'd want to write that as `x > 0
-> x | -x`.)

Another use of `case` is augmenting the first-differences example
above with the initial value of the sequence `x`:

    (case (- x (let (i (- i 1)) x)) x)

Here we suppose that when `i` is at its minimum valid value, such as
0, then `(let (i (- i 1)) x)` will fail, leaving a hole that can be
filled with `x`.

XXX for efficient evaluation we need to be able to tell which
dimensions are going to stay rectangular.

### iota ###

The expression `(iota var expr)` evaluates to `(agg (var) (0 0) (1 1)
(2 2) ... (n n))`, where `n` is one less than the value to which the
expression `expr` evaluated.

XXX this sucks compared to writing `1:10` in Octave or R.  You have to
name a variable!  Moreover you still have to index it.

### Standard reductions ###

The expression `(sum (month) production)` produces a result that is
the same as the result of evaluating `production` except that all the
rows differing only by `month` have been summed together, and the
`month` key column has been removed.  This generalizes in obvious ways
to multiple key columns and to the other standard reductions
`product`, `min`, `max`, and `mean`.

XXX this means that `month` does escape as a free variable, but the
result won't depend on it, and there's no way to get a sum over more
months than you have some other iteration variable to throw away; this
is surely the wrong semantics, and the one explained earlier is surely
better.  Given some of the evaluation semantics explored above, it
could probably get the valid months out of `production`.  But then how
do you get a sum over only certain months?  Maybe `(sum (mi) (let
(month (agg (mi) (1 3) (2 5) (3 11))) production))`, maybe with some
syntactic sugar like `sum{mi} production[month[mi]=[3 5 11]]`?

### Monoidal prefix sums ###

XXX

### Non-monoidal reduction ###

The expression `(for var1 seq var2 start var3 reducer)` expresses a
general definite loop.  It evaluates `seq` in its surrounding
environment and produces an aggregate "the sequence" with, hopefully,
the variable `var1` free.  It also evaluates `start` in its
surrounding environment and produces "the initial state".  Then it
proceeds sequentially along the sorted values of `var1` in the domain
of the sequence, evaluating `reducer` once for each sequence item, in
an environment with `var2` bound to the sequence item and `var3` bound
to the previous result of `reducer` or, on the first iteration, the
initial state.

XXX wait, the loop state has to be a single atomic value?

XXX "domain" and "range" are better than "key" and "result" column;
"domain variable" is maybe better than "free variable" for aggregates.

Variable capture
----------------

As described above, the model has the same variable capture problem as
Lisp macros, only much worse.

Consider this expression for describing the *L<sub>p</sub>* norm of a
vector:

    (** (sum (i) (** x p)) (/ 1 p))

This relies on the fact that the `i` introduced by the `sum` is
visible to `x` so that it can select the elements of `x`.  Similarly,
consider this code to evaluate a polynomial at a point
(inefficiently):

    (sum (i) (* a (** x i)))

This relies on implicitly indexing `a` with `i`.  But consider this
expression for describing matrix-vector multiplication:

    (sum (k) (* (let (j k) a) (let (i k) x)))

This has a free variable `i` which ranges over the columns of `a` (or
rather its `j`-indices).  To do the summation, we need to introduce a
new, fresh loop variable `k`; it is our intention that the only two
uses of `k` be indexing the `i`-indices of `x` and indexing the
`j`-indices of `a`.

But what happens if `a` or `x` internally has a free variable, which
is to say an argument, `k`?  Disaster strikes!  Instead of bubbling up
to the sum expression as a whole, it becomes part of the iteration,
with bizarre results that will potentially be difficult to debug.

On the other hand, if we change the language's scoping to purely
lexical, constructs like `(let (j k) a)` make no sense --- lexically
`a` does not contain `j`, so that expression would be equivalent to
just `a`.  And `(** (sum (i) (** x p)) (/ 1 p))` relies on the
visibility of the index `i` to the vector `x`.

This is more or less just the standard problem of variable capture
that occurs in Lisp macros or with dynamic scoping, but it's much more
severe in this context, because of the pervasive use of free variables
for implicit parameter passing through many stack levels.

The usual Common Lisp approach to solving the problem would be
something like this:

    (let ((k (gensym)))
       `(sum (,k) (* (let (j ,k) a) (let (i ,k) x))))

Alternatively, but awfully, you could use a name less likely to
collide:

    (sum (*matrix-multiply-index*)
      (* (let (j *matrix-multiply-index*) a)
         (let (i *matrix-multiply-index*) x)))

[Alan Bawden and Jonathan Rees's "syntactic closures"
mechanism](https://apps.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/a195921.pdf "AI Memo 1049, Bawden 1988")
offers an relatively simple solution that is not difficult to
implement (see also [Chris Hanson's shorter 1991
proposal](https://groups.csail.mit.edu/mac/ftpdir/users/cph/macros/prop.ps.gz)
and [the superb Scheme Wiki
page](http://community.schemewiki.org/?syntactic-closures), and also
[Stephen Paul Carl's 1996 master's thesis on an extension of
it](ftp://ftp.cs.utexas.edu/pub/garbage/carl-msthesis.ps)); Scheme
unfortunately standardized on [Will Clinger's "Macros that
Work"](https://3e8.org/pub/pdf-t1/macros_that_work.pdf "Clinger 1991")
instead, which is a much more complex mechanism to implement.

On the other hand, because of the evaluation semantics outlined above,
a different kind of variable capture that occurs in Scheme is absent
here.  Bawden and Rees give the example

    (define-macro (push obj-exp list-var)
      `(set! ,list-var (cons ,obj-exp ,list-var)))
    ...
    (let ((cons 5))
      (push 'foo stack))

in which the expression containing the macro invocation expands to

    (let ((cons 5))
      (set! stack (cons 'foo stack))

which will give an error due to attempting to invoke the number 5 as a
function.  I assert without demonstrating that the corresponding
problem does not arise in this new language.

XXX does it?

A simple direct fix for the matrix-vector-multiply problem is to have
a `fresh` or `new` or `my` annotation that generates the equivalent of
a syntactic closure or gensym:

    (sum ((my k)) (* (let (j k) a) (let (i k) x)))

However, this is bug-prone; code that unintentionally omits the `my`
tag will function correctly, perhaps for years, until used in a
context where variable capture occurs, which may be a result of a
change to code that doesn't even explicitly invoke the matrix multiply
or whatever, even renaming a variable or something.  A different
alternative is to make the variables introduced by expressions like
`sum` implicitly lexical, but continue to treat `let` variables as
dynamically-scoped; this would leave the matrix-vector multiply as I
had originally written it, but the Minkowski *p*-norm code would
change from

    (** (sum (i) (** x p)) (/ 1 p))

to the perhaps more gnomic

    (** (sum (i) (** (let (i i) x) p)) (/ 1 p))

and change the polynomial-evaluation code from

    (sum (i) (* a (** x i)))

analogously to

    (sum (i) (* (let (i i) a) (** x i)))

(I reiterate that the S-expression form shown here is not intended as
the syntax for interactive use, but just as an unambiguous
representation of the internal tree structure; perhaps on the display
this would be written as *a<sub>i=i</sub>* or abbreviated in something
like the conventional way as *a<sub>i</sub>*.)

However, there's still the possibility of unintended variable capture
in an expression such as

    (let (h (* n dh)) (/ (- (let (x (+ x h)) f) f) h))

where we are really just using `let` to factor out a common
subexpression, rather than to pass arguments to code or index data
lexically defined elsewhere.

A third alternative would be to require every introduction of a new
variable by `let`, `sum`, and the like, to be explicitly marked as
statically or dynamically scoped, but this seems like it would still
be bug-prone --- a variable incorrectly marked as dynamically scoped
would still be a bug.  You could catch this by requiring that the
dynamically-scoped variable *not be used statically*, though.

A fourth alternative would be to declare the variables at some lexical
scope, in some cases module scope (where, in the context of
`dercuano-plotting`, a module might be a note or a plot).  Then, an
expression like

    (** (sum (i) (** x p)) (/ 1 p))

would be referring to some `i` that was already in scope, perhaps
imported from another module or perhaps declared in the same module,
and would be a compilation error if there were no such variable, so in
theory you would know that you were capturing a variable that could be
used as a parameter; while on the other hand an expression like

    (** (sum ((my idx)) (** (let (i idx) x) p)) (/ 1 p))

would be introducing a new `idx` variable.  This seems simultaneously
more awkward and less safe than most of the alternatives above.

Extradimensional features
-------------------------

In the UI, you can write a table with some key columns and some value
columns; each value column becomes a new aggregate, stored under a
variable with the name in the column header, indexed by all the key
columns.  If you don't have key columns, a nominal invisible key
column is generated.

The top level of the UI defines an environment, or a sequence of
environments, within which each expression is evaluated.

XXX does this mean it does some kind of topological sort to come up
with an evaluation order?

When you define an expression with a single continuous free variable,
the UI by default plots its value against that free variable in a 2-D
plot, heuristically picking an initial range that seems likely to be
interesting (which you can then interactively zoom and pan).  If you
define an expression with two continuous free variables, it by default
generates a contour plot in a similar way, with a 3-D heightfield plot
a click away.  Discrete free variables that belong to some numerical
range get, by default, a lollipop plot; discrete free variables that
are merely nominal result in a labeled small-multiples display,
switchable with a click to a single plot with multiple lines (or
lollipops or whatever).  Tabular results display is always available,
but only enabled by default for small tables.

The UI uses the same kind of introspective magic for this that `sum`
uses to figure out the possible values that `month` can take on in
`(sum (month) production)`.  This allows it to distinguish between
discrete and continuous parameters based on how they're used, a sort
of type inference, find out what their valid values would be, and
measure their limits.

Automatic differentiation
-------------------------

How can we squeeze reverse-mode automatic differentiation into this
model?