I watched Tony Hoare’s 2009 talk about how null pointers were a
billion-dollar mistake today.  One of the things he mentioned was
that, often, pointers are used because computer memory doesn’t
stretch — you want to logically include some child object into a
parent object, but the child object has a potentially variable size,
so you’re stuck using a pointer to it (a Box, in Rust parlance).  If
you had “India-rubber memory” that could expand without invalidating
later pointers, you could just include the child object inside the
parent, as we traditionally represent syntax trees in text using
nested brackets.

This is an appealing idea, and I wonder if you actually could make it
work in practice, using some kind of flexible buffer scheme to hold
all your data — like Emacs buffers with markers pointing into them,
except that the buffers can contain not only characters but also
references to markers.  To the extent that you can make your data
immutable, you can avoid the need to update the positions of markers
from inserting and deleting data in the middle of the buffer.  You
need the markers in order to be able to rapidly jump over
variable-length child objects and reach later children.

For example, suppose you have these definitions (from the FlatBuffers
tutorial):

      struct Vec3 {
        x:float;
        y:float;
        z:float;
      }

      table Monster {
        pos:Vec3; // Struct.
        mana:short = 150;
        hp:short = 100;
        name:string;
        friendly:bool = false;
        inventory:[ubyte];  // Vector of scalars.
      }

Now, if you know the starting byte position of a `Monster`, you can
easily find the starting byte position of its `pos`, `mana`, `hp`, or
`name`, since those are all at fixed offsets.  But `friendly` comes
after `name`, and `name` is variable-length, so somewhere we must
store a marker to find `friendly` with — a marker which will continue
to point to `friendly` even if some characters are inserted or deleted
in `name`.  From that marker we can find the byte position of
`inventory`, since `friendly` itself is fixed-size.  We don’t need a
second marker to find the end of the object, but since the
variable-length `name` and `inventory` fields make `Monster` as a
whole variable-length, we would need an array of markers to organize
an array of `Monster`s, and if `Monster` were embedded in some other
object, we’d need a marker to find the field following the `Monster`.

At least, that’s one possible set of implementation decisions.  You
could also imagine storing the markers at the end of the `Monster`,
and using the end position rather than the start position to identify
the `Monster`, which would have the advantage that you could write out
the representation in a purely sequential fashion with no
backpatching, which in turn would allow you to use variable-length
representations for the markers, such as variable-length byte counts.
In that case, you’d need a marker to find the beginning of `inventory`
(and the end of `friendly`) and a marker to find the beginning of
`name` (the end of `hp`).  In this case, this “trailers”
representation requires more markers than a “headers” representation
would, but that’s only because the last field is variable-length; more
usually both would require the same number of markers.

You could also imagine representing the markers in such a way that an
update to them was needed under different circumstances.  For example,
you could represent a marker as a sequence of indices into B-tree
blocks walking down from some root, and only an insertion into a
B-tree block before the marker would require an update to that marker;
or you could represent it as something like a BASIC line number, in
the sense that the marker destinations would be physically present in
the buffer along with characters, in a lexicographically ordered
fashion, and might occasionally need a “renum” operation to
redistribute them over the index space, which could be carried out
somewhat lazily.

