Reading
<http://www.scientificamerican.com/article/how-to-raise-a-genius-lessons-from-a-45-year-study-of-supersmart-children/>
and it talks about how the top 1% in intelligence are responsible for
a lot of our science and culture.  Some controversial previous
discussion has focused on how differences in variance and means
between different groups might affect questions like this; Larry
Summers got fired over such discussion, for example.

The Wikipedia article
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sex_differences_in_intelligence>
summarizes the situation.

The top 1% are 2.33 standard deviations to the right of the mean in a
Gaussian distribution, which is 135 IQ in the overall population:

    > qnorm(.99)
    [1] 2.326348
    > qnorm(.99, mean=100, sd=15)
    [1] 134.8952
    > pnorm(135, mean=100, sd=15)
    [1] 0.9901847

What if you have a subpopulation with a 10% smaller variance?  It
turns out to reduce the number of people in that subpopulation in the
top 1% by more than a factor of 2:

    > pnorm(135, mean=100, sd=15*.9)
    [1] 0.9952372

What if instead you have a subpopulation whose mean is shifted down by
one standard deviation, without changing the variance — an effect size
of 1?  This reduces the number of people in that subpopulation in the
top 1% by a factor of 20:

    > pnorm(135, mean=85, sd=15)
    [1] 0.9995709

This is true even though the probability is quite reasonable that an
event from this group will be higher than an event drawn from the
entire population.

The situation becomes more extreme as you go to more extreme
quantiles.  Consider the top 0.01%:

    > qnorm(.9999)
    [1] 3.719016
    > qnorm(.9999, mean=100, sd=15)
    [1] 155.7852
    > pnorm(156, mean=100, sd=15)
    [1] 0.9999055
    > pnorm(156, mean=100, sd=15*.9)
    [1] 0.9999832
    > pnorm(156, mean=85, sd=15)
    [1] 0.9999989

That is, at IQ 156 and above, where we find 0.01% of the population, a
hypothetical population with a 10% lower standard deviation will be
underrepresented by almost 6:1, and a hypothetical population with a
1-SD-lower mean will be underrepresented by more than 90:1; getting
the same result by tweaking the variance requires a 21% smaller
standard deviation, 11.9 IQ points.

A hypothetical group with a 1-SD-lower mean but also a 21% *larger*
standard deviation (of 19 IQ points) matches and slightly exceeds the
overall population at this level:

    > pnorm(156, mean=85, sd=15/.79)
    [1] 0.9999077

In this context it is worth pointing out that tutoring improves
student performance by two standard deviations (Anania (1982, 1983)
and Burke (1984)):
<http://changelog.ca/quote/2012/09/23/tutoring_two_sigma>.

So what if we have a hypothetical group with an unchanged variance but
a mean two standard deviations higher?

    > pnorm(156, mean=130, sd=15)
    [1] 0.9584818

If student performance is equivalent to IQ, 4.2% of them will exceed
the performance of 99.99% of the rest of the population.  This is a
larger difference than has ever been suggested for (mean or variance)
intelligence differences due to race or sex.

(In the paper described, tutoring also substantially reduced the
variance of achievement scores, but this is probably because the
achievement scores had a ceiling; all three of the distribution curves
from the experimental data intersect at the X-axis on the right, and
the “tutorial” group’s distribution is noticeably skewed to the left.)

