Every language seems to have string formatting as some kind of DSL.  C
has its `%3.4g` nonsense. JS, Perl, and Python programmers often use
the same thing.  C++ has iostream format manipulators `cout << setw(3)
<< setprecision(4) << x`.  BASIC had `PRINT USING`.  Fortran had
FORMAT.  Common Lisp has its own insanely powerful FORMAT, taking
strings like "~3,4g", which means something almost, but not quite,
completely unlike `%3.4g`.  Even Excel has its own numeric formatting
language; if you want your lakhs and crores properly displayed,
apparently you can say "Format Cells → Custom" and then
`[>9999999]##\,##\,##\,##0.00;[>99999]##\,##\,##0.00;##,##0.00;
[<-9999999](##\,##\,##\,##0.00);[<-99999](##\,##\,##0.00);##,##0.00`

Forth's embedded domain-specific language for "pictured numeric output"
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Forth "pictured numeric output" is, like C++'s approach, an embedded
DSL, but much more direct in its functioning; the typical example is
something like

    : .pesos <# # #  [char] . hold  #s  [char] $ hold #>  type ;

which has the format string actually backwards, because that's the
order in which you do decimal conversion, and is also using
double-precision fixed-point math because that's the way you do things
in Forth.

Because it's an embedded DSL, you can use the standard methods of
abstraction.  For example, if you want more flexible currency display,
you can factor out parts of your format string into subroutines or
variables:

    defer currency
    : pesos [char] $ hold ;
    : pounds C" £" dup 1+ C@ swap 2 + C@ hold hold ; ( assuming UTF-8 )

    variable decimal-point

    : .$ <# # # decimal-point @ hold #s currency #> type ;

    : argentina  [char] , decimal-point !  ['] pesos is currency ;
    : usa        [char] . decimal-point !  ['] pesos is currency ;
    : england    [char] . decimal-point !  ['] pounds is currency ;

    8.4300 7.8300 d+ d2/ d>s constant dolar-blue \ www.dolarblue.net 2013-03-31
    1.5195 d>s constant £                        \ in dollars; xe.com 2013-03-31
    : /$ 10000 swap m*/ drop s>d ;
    : convert 2dup ." AR"    argentina                  .$
              2dup ."  = US" usa     dolar-blue /$      .$
              2dup ."  = "   england dolar-blue /$ £ /$ .$
              2drop ;

    cr 1500.00 convert   \ my rent in Buenos Aires

You could even put a complex iterative state machine into your format
string; in this case we take advantage of Forth's compile-time
metaprogramming to factor out a duplicative control structure:

    char , constant thousands-separator
    : ?#  postpone #  
        postpone 2dup  postpone d0=
        postpone if  postpone exit  postpone then ;  immediate
    : #,s  begin  ?# ?# ?#  thousands-separator hold  again ;
    : #करोड़s  ?# ?# ?#  thousands-separator hold 
      begin ?# ?#  thousands-separator hold  again ; ( for e.g. 1,00,00,00,000 )
    : .,  <# #,s #> type ;   : .करोड़ <# #करोड़s #> type ;

Forth's particular implementation of this concept is quite limited,
though; you have to build the output string backwards, the buffer area
is quite limited in size, and it's eager.

The more usual approach of external DSLs
----------------------------------------

But, when it's a non-embedded DSL, the DSL only goes so far.  I seem
to end up writing a lot of string formatting code that looks more or
less like this:

        def __repr__(self):
            return 'Note(%r, %r, %r, %r)' % (self.instrument,
                                             self.start_time,
                                             self.pitch,
                                             self.volume)

        def __repr__(self):
            return '[[ %r %r %r ]]' % (self.left, self.op, self.right)

This is, in all likelihood, grossly inefficient.  Erlang's approach,
which I used in [Ur-Scheme][], is called "IO lists", and it's similar
to "ropes": represent strings with arbitrary unbalanced binary trees,
waiting until I/O time to walk the trees in O(N) time.  This gives you
O(1) concatenation, which makes string concatenation efficient, but it
doesn't really solve the DSL problem.

[Ur-Scheme]: http://canonical.org/~kragen/sw/urscheme

(The description makes it sound complicated but the implementation is
about 23 lines of code in Ur-Scheme, and it could have been shorter
with a little more cleverness.)

Here's a use of IO lists in Erlang:

    join([])           -> "";
    join([W])          -> W;
    join([W1, W2])     -> [W1, " and ", W2];
    join([W1, W2, W3]) -> [W1, ", ", W2, ", and ", W3];
    join([W1|Ws])      -> [W1, ", ", join(Ws)].

When invoked with `io:format("~s; ~s; ~s; ~s; ~s.~n",
[commalist:join([]), commalist:join(["Apple", "Banana", "Carrot"]),
commalist:join(["One", "Two"]), commalist:join(["Lonely"]),
commalist:join("abcdefg")]).`, this produces, "; Apple, Banana, and
Carrot; One and Two; Lonely; a, b, c, d, e, f, and g."

Smalltalk's approach: output to a string (and capture it if necessary)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Smalltalk has an interesting approach; in general, instead of
concatenating strings (which is APLish `,` in Smalltalk) you
sequentially write them to a stream, and if you need them in a string,
you can use `WriteStream on: String new` for that string, and there's
even a `String#streamContents:limitedTo:` method for this.  Here's the
code that gets run from `Date today asString` in Squeak 3.9,
eventually yielding '31 March 2013', with some added commentary in
case you're not familiar with Smalltalk syntax:

    asString
        "Answer a string that represents the receiver."

        "^, read 'answer', means 'return' and was once displayed as ↑."
        ^ self printString  

    printString
        "Answer a String whose characters are a description of the receiver. 
        If you want to print without a character limit, use fullPrintString."

        ^ self printStringLimitedTo: 50000

    printStringLimitedTo: limit
        "Answer a String whose characters are a description of the receiver.
        If you want to print without a character limit, use fullPrintString."
        "The following declares a local variable limitedString."
        | limitedString |
        "_ is assignment and was traditionally displayed as ←.
        Nowadays it is usually written := instead.
        [:s | self printOn: s] is JS's function(s){return self.printOn(s)}.
        So the following in JS would be
        var limitedString = String.streamContentsLimitedTo(function(s) {
            return self.printOn(s);
        }, limit);
        "
        limitedString _ String streamContents: [:s | self printOn: s] limitedTo: limit.
        limitedString size < limit ifTrue: [^ limitedString].
        ^ limitedString , '...etc...'

    printOn: aStream
        self printOn: aStream format: #(1 2 3 $  3 1 )  "$  is space, #() array"

    printOn: aStream format: formatArray 
        "Print a description of the receiver on aStream using the format 
        denoted the argument, formatArray: 
            #(item item item sep monthfmt yearfmt twoDigits) 
            items: 1=day 2=month 3=year will appear in the order given, 
            separated by sep which is eaither an ascii code or character. 
            monthFmt: 1=09 2=Sep 3=September 
            yearFmt: 1=1996 2=96 
            digits: (missing or)1=9 2=09. 
        See the examples in printOn: and mmddyy"
        | gregorian twoDigits element monthFormat |
        "The #dayMonthYearDo: method strikes me as bizarre in this context:"
        gregorian _ self dayMonthYearDo: [ :d :m :y | {d. m. y} ].
        twoDigits _ formatArray size > 6 and: [(formatArray at: 7) > 1].
        1 to: 3 do: 
            [ :i | 
                element := formatArray at: i.
                element = 1
                    ifTrue: [twoDigits
                            ifTrue: [aStream
                                    nextPutAll: (gregorian first asString
                                            padded: #left
                                            to: 2
                                            with: $0)]
                            ifFalse: [gregorian first printOn: aStream]].
                element = 2
                    ifTrue: [monthFormat := formatArray at: 5.
                        monthFormat = 1
                            ifTrue: [twoDigits
                                    ifTrue: [aStream
                                            nextPutAll: (gregorian middle asString
                                                    padded: #left
                                                    to: 2
                                                    with: $0)]
                                    ifFalse: [gregorian middle printOn: aStream]].
                        monthFormat = 2
                            ifTrue: [aStream
                                    nextPutAll: ((Month nameOfMonth: gregorian middle)
                                            copyFrom: 1
                                            to: 3)].
                        monthFormat = 3
                            ifTrue: [aStream
                                    nextPutAll: (Month nameOfMonth: gregorian middle)]].
                element = 3
                    ifTrue: [(formatArray at: 6)
                                = 1
                            ifTrue: [gregorian last printOn: aStream]
                            ifFalse: [aStream
                                    nextPutAll: ((gregorian last \\ 100) asString
                                            padded: #left
                                            to: 2
                                            with: $0)]].
                i < 3
                    ifTrue: [(formatArray at: 4)
                                ~= 0
                            ifTrue: [aStream nextPut: (formatArray at: 4) asCharacter]]]

And down inside of String:

    padded: leftOrRight to: length with: char
        leftOrRight = #left ifTrue:
            [^ (String new: (length - self size max: 0) withAll: char) , self].
        leftOrRight = #right ifTrue:
            [^ self , (String new: (length - self size max: 0) withAll: char)].

And the `Number#asString` method that's being used to do the actual
conversions ends up writing to a string stream, then reversing it:

    printStringBase: base
        | stream integer next |
        self = 0 ifTrue: [^'0'].
        self negative ifTrue: [^'-', (self negated printStringBase: base)].
        stream _ WriteStream on: String new.
        integer _ self normalize.
        [integer > 0] whileTrue: [
            next _ integer quo: base.
            stream nextPut: (Character digitValue: integer - (next * base)).
            integer _ next].
        ^stream contents reversed

This demonstrates that Smalltalk code is not uniform in simply using
`nextPutAll:`.  Indeed, since Smalltalk has garbage collection, code
that uses string concatenation is simpler than code that repeatedly
writes to an output stream; it's just less efficient.

The streamContents:limitedTo: method mentioned earlier takes advantage
of XXX

    streamContents: blockWithArg limitedTo: sizeLimit
        | stream |
        stream _ LimitedWriteStream on: (self new: (100 min: sizeLimit)).
        stream setLimit: sizeLimit limitBlock: [^ stream contents].
        blockWithArg value: stream.
        ^ stream contents

The "limitBlock" here can be invoked from deep inside of whatever code
runs from `blockWithArg`, leaping over many stack frames to discard
half-completed execution and return the so-far-accumulated data.  (I
assume it executes `ensure:` blocks on the way?)

Coroutines for string formatting
--------------------------------

Instead of a buffer or a stack, use a channel, and run the
string-formatting code as a coroutine.  That way you get the benefits
of an embedded DSL, along with laziness, laziness which in this
context will very often reduce memory usage rather than increasing it;
and you can avoid generating intermediate copies of parts of the
string you're generating.

This requires efficient coroutine support in your language, and likely
a certain amount of buffering: probably at least a machine word, if
not a whole cache line.  Otherwise you need a coroutine context switch
on every byte transferred, which will slow some applications
significantly.



