Suppose we want to do type inference on JS code so that we can run it
faster or statically debug it or some shit like that.

Now, some things are really easy to infer a type for:

    var projectionMatrix = [ [1, 0, 0, 0]
                           , [0, 1, 0, 0]
                           , [0, 0, 1, 0]
                           , [0, 0, 0, 1]
                           ]

That's clearly an Array of Arrays of Numbers, although you get into
some weird subtyping stuff if you start caring about whether they're
ints or not.  (In this case they're not, because it gets mutated later
on.)  Also it happens that it's specifically a 4x4 array of arrays,
and that matters in this case.

There are things that are intermediate:

    function evToPoint(ev) {
      var ref = cvs.getBoundingClientRect();
      // This is clearly wrong, but my theory is that maybe this will make
      // it return SOME point within the canvas on old iOS.  Probably I
      // should use pageX there instead.
      return { x: (ev.clientX - ref.left) % cvs.width
             , y: (ev.clientY - ref.top) % cvs.height
             };
    }

This takes an object `ev`, which needs to have `clientX` and `clientY`
properties (but might have other properties too), and they need to be
Numbers (except that in JS `"fuck" - "you"` is actually valid and
returns a NaN), and returns an object with exactly the properties `x`
and `y`, which are also Numbers, presupposing that `cvs` has a
`getBoundingClientRect` property that is a function of no arguments
returning a thing with `left` and `top` Number properties, and also
`cvs` needs to have Number properties called `width` and `height`.

Now if it happens that all of these things are true, then we could
probably use like a super optimized version of `evToPoint`.  But if
some of them aren't true, we might still want to remain JS-compliant,
and just skip the optimization part.  But if you can find all the
calls to `evToPoint`, maybe you can prove that those properties are
always true, so you can always use the optimized version and not even
compile an unoptimized version.

Other things are really hard to infer a type for.  Like `["x", 3]`, or
`function(obj, prop, val) { obj[prop] = val; }`.

How about an RJS, though?  Like RPython, but for JS.  A restricted
subset of JS that doesn't allow you to do anything that interferes
with type inference.  This seems feasible to me, although it's not
going to be as simple as type inference for ML, because you
unavoidably have some subtyping.

In particular, I think you need OCaml's upper-bound and lower-bound
types for objects with properties if you're going to have
heterogeneous data structures: it's fine to pass {x:3, y:4, z:5} to a
function that needs x and y to be numbers, but not fine to pass {x:3,
y:4} to a function that needs x, y, and z to be numbers.  Along the
same lines, integers are a subtype of numbers in general, and probably
an important one (although JS normally does gradual overflow, I don't
think I've ever seen a JS program where this would matter).  Once
you're dealing with subtyping, maybe you could also deal with arrays
of known size as a subtype of arrays of unknown size.

I'm not sure how exactly to deal with mutability, although subtyping
might help.  Immutable-array-of-integers is covariantly a subtype of
immutable-array-of-numbers, and mutable-array-of-integers is a subtype
of immutable-array-of-integers, but mutable-array-of-integers is not a
subtype of mutable-array-of-numbers, because you can jam 1.5 into the
latter.  Unless I'm confused about the subtyping relation.

You probably also need to distinguish Objects used as hash tables
(mapping strings to objects of some type) from Objects used as
structs.  Given the RJS niche, you could simply forbid using an object
in both ways; it's trivial to rewrite `x.y = 3` into `x['y'] = 3`.

RJS wouldn't need to support inheritance.
