(See also file `low-power-micros`.)

The energy available from keystrokes on a regular keyboard is almost
10 milliwatts: plenty to power a portable electronic word processor,
so you could write a novel on one without an external power source.
However, so far, energy harvesting keyboards are probably too
inefficient to make this practical.

[XKCD What if? 102][102] characterizes the energy produced by tapping
keyboard keys; it cites [Nagurka et al. 1999][1] as providing a
smallish estimate:

> Using data from a study of rubber-dome keyboards—the most common
> type these days—… the energy required to press a key is around 1.5
> millijoules for a letter key and 2.5 for a big key like the enter
> key or spacebar.

[1]: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpl/articleDetails.jsp?arnumber=786140 "Design of a test rig for measurement of stiffness and damping characteristics of computer keyboard keys"
[102]: http://what-if.xkcd.com/102/ "Keyboard Power"

Summary of results
------------------

A keystroke adds, usually, a single letter or space to your novel. It
provides 1300 microjoules of energy, of which 2.25 microjoules are
needed by an LPC1100-family CPU to run word-processing software, 25
microjoules are needed by the E-Paper display to display the letter on
the screen, and 0.5 microjoules are needed to eventually store the
letter permanently in a Flash memory if you don’t erase it, for a
total of 27.75 microjoules out of the 1300 available.  This means you
need at least 2% efficient conversion of the keystroke energy, which
commercially available pushbutton energy harvesting devices have
barely achieved (they claim 2–5%.)

However, solar power or pullstring dynamos are probably better
options.  Typing at 90 wpm provides 10 mW of power, but only while
you’re typing, and that’s 0.2–0.5 mW after conversion inefficiency; a
30mm-square solar panel provides 10 mW all the time.

Keystroke energy estimation
---------------------------

Nagurka et al.'s estimate
seemed a little high to me: if for each keystroke your 50-gram
fingers have to travel a 4mm key travel in, say, half a second, and
then hit the bottom and stop, then the kinetic energy of your finger
is closer to a microjoule per keystroke than a millijoule:

    user@debian:~/devel/hojas$ units
    2526 units, 72 prefixes, 56 nonlinear units

    You have: 50 g * (4mm / 0.5 s)^2/2
    You want: mJ
            * 0.0016
            / 625

A [more recent open-access article by the same author][8] explains in
more detail.  The conclusions of the paper are not very sensitive to
how fast your fingers move, because the paper has graphs of the
measurements of the spring force of the rubber-dome keys, which is
much larger than what is necessary to decelerate your finger and is
not particularly sensitive to the speed at which the key is pressed:
for 3mm of the 3.5mm travel of the “K” key in one keyboard he tests,
for example, the force is between 0.4 newtons and 0.55 newtons
regardless of whether the key is moving 0.5 mm/s or 80 mm/s, with the
speed amounting to about 0.1 newtons of difference, i.e. about 25%.

0.45 newtons times 3mm is 1.35 millijoules.

[8]: http://www.eng.mu.edu/nagurka/NagurkaMarklin_Measurement%20of%20Stiffness%20and%20Damping%20Characteristics_JDMSC.pdf "Measurement of Stiffness and Damping Characteristics of Computer Keyboard Keys, Nagurka and Marklin., 2005"

0.45 newtons by itself would decelerate a 50-gram finger at 9 m/s/s,
which is to say that it’s just about the weight of the finger.  If
your finger were moving at 60mm/s without you applying continuous
force to it, it would come to a stop in just under 7ms at 0.45
newtons.  So the vast majority of the energy transmitted from your
finger to the key is never part of the kinetic energy of your finger.

(Most of this energy is returned to your finger when the key comes
back up, so it might be more difficult to type on a keyboard that
harvests this energy.  Experience with manual typewriters suggests
that this problem will be minimal.)

Conservatively we might want to disregard the part of the energy
estimate that’s due to Nagurka and Marklin’s model of how fast your
fingers move, because he assumes that your keystrokes don’t overlap,
which they clearly do.  But the difference, as you can see above, is
small.

Even with this well-substantiated estimate, which is much higher than
what I’d come up with, Randall goes on to calculate that this isn’t a
very useful amount of energy for things like running a modern laptop
or microwaving a burrito.

At 90 words per minute, we have almost 10mW of available power:

    You have: 90*5*1.3mJ/minute
    You want: mW
            * 9.75
            / 0.1025641

Keyboard-powered computers
--------------------------

The original question, though, was this:

> As a writer, I’m wondering what would be the cumulative energy of
> the hundreds of thousands of keystrokes required to write a novel.
> 
> —Nicolas Dickner

Perhaps Nicolas was actually wondering, in particular, whether you
could run a computer to write the novel on with the energy from the
keystrokes, so that he wouldn’t have to worry about losing his battery
charger or wearing out his battery and being unable to write.

In some sense the answer is clearly yes: people wrote novels on
mechanical typewriters whose data storage mechanism was ink stamped
onto paper with a mechanism powered by pressing the keys, although
they were somewhat more effort to press than modern keyboard keys.
Intuitively it seems like electronics ought to allow us to do
*better*.

So how much power do you really need?  Perhaps laptops are an
energy-inefficient way to write novels, compared to other kinds of
portable computers.  And in fact it turns out that running an
electronic word processor on keyboard power is easily feasible,
although I don’t know of anyone who’s done it.

CPU power consumption
---------------------

CPU power consumption is not a problem, unless your CPU doesn’t have a
working sleep mode.  Summary:

    |                   | nJ / instruction | instructions/keystroke |
    | feasibility limit |              170 |                   7500 |
    | MSP430            |              0.9 |                1400000 |
    | PIC24             |               2? |                 600000 |
    | 1990s StrongARM   |                1 |                1300000 |
    | LPC1110           |              0.3 |                4300000 |
    | Pentium           |               10 |                 130000 |
    | STM32L0           |             0.23 |                5700000 |

### Details ###

You can write a novel using a Commodore 64 or Apple ][, and several
people did.  They can update text on the screen with relatively
complex word-processing logic while keeping up with your typing speed,
even at high typing speeds like 160 words per minute.  These were
8-bit computers based on the MOSTek 6502 microprocessor and its
variant the 6510, which typically run about 200 000 instructions per
second.  Because those instructions only manipulated 8 bits of data at
a time, you usually need about twice as many of them as on a modern
32-bit microprocessor to do the same work.  (In some cases you need
more like 8 times as many, and in other cases you need the same number
or even less, but those cases are rare.)

(Other 8-bit home computers of the time period, like the Nintendo NES,
the Altair and all the CP/M computers that followed it, the Atari
2600, the various TRS-80s, and the Pac-Man arcade machine, were
similar in speed.  The IBM PC was maybe three to five times faster.)

So if we divide 100 000 32-bit instructions per second by 160 words
per minute, we get a number of instructions per keystroke that is
known to be sufficient: about 7500 instructions per keystroke.

So can one keystroke, in the microjoule to millijoule range, produce
enough energy for 7500 32-bit CPU instructions?  That would require
power consumption of less than about 170 nanojoules per instruction.

The most common low-power microcontroller family today is the TI
MSP430.  It’s a 16-bit microcontroller, and TI recently published a
[white paper on its power consumption][2] which shows two members of
this family running at a million instructions per second on 300 and
515 microamps on a 3-volt power supply; 300 microamps times 3 volts
gives us 900 microwatts, and dividing 900 microwatts / 1MIPS gives us
0.9 nanojoules per instruction.

[2]: http://www.ti.com/general/docs/lit/getliterature.tsp?baseLiteratureNumber=slay015&fileType=pdf

That is, for the MSP430F2001 described in the white paper, a keystroke
provides almost 200 times as much power as would be needed to run a
word processor to handle that keystroke.

Dividing it another way, a 1.3-millijoule keystroke provides enough
power to run the MSP430 at 1 MIPS (five times as fast as a Commodore
64) for 1.4 seconds.

The point of the whitepaper is to compare the MSP430 favorably to a
PIC24 microcontroller from another chip vendor, which (according to
TI) needs two or three times more power: they estimate that the PIC
could run off a particular coin cell with a 1% duty cycle for less
than two years without recharging, while the MSPs could last four to
six years.

Academic papers report the fabrication of [10pJ/instruction][4] and
[2.6pJ/instruction][5] microcontrollers, which is another two orders
of magnitude better than the MSP430’s 900 pJ/insn.  Even as far back
as the 20th century, [the DEC StrongARM SA1110 used one nanojoule per
instruction][6], and there were 22-picojoule-per-instruction
microcontrollers reported and 1-picojoule-per-instruction ones being
designed.

[4]: http://www-mtl.mit.edu/researchgroups/icsystems/pubs/conferences/2008/ickes_asscc2008_paper.pdf "A 10-pJ/instruction, 4-MIPS Micropower DSP for Sensor Applications, Ickes et al., MIT, 2008"
[5]: http://web.eecs.umich.edu/~taustin/papers/VLSI06-sublim.pdf "A 2.60pJ/Inst Subthreshold Sensor Processor for Optimal Energy Efficiency, Zhai et. al., poster, 2006"
[6]: http://www.researchgate.net/profile/Kristofer_Pister/publication/2955370_Smart_Dust_communicating_with_a_cubic-millimeter_computer/file/e0b4951e43fbf4b41b.pdf

Zhai also published
<https://web.eecs.umich.edu/~taustin/papers/TVLSI09-subliminal.pdf> on
the 2.6pJ processor.

The most interesting microcontroller to me right now is the 32-bit
Philips/NXP [LPC1110 family][7], which can apparently run at 48MHz
(and 48MIPS) at 1.8 volts and just under 8 milliamps.  Dividing,
that’s 0.3 nanojoules per instruction, three times better than the
MSP430!  However, the chip suffers about a 6 microamp leakage current
in deep-sleep mode at room temperature, so each keystroke only
provides enough energy to keep it in deep sleep mode for about 20
minutes.  The LPC1110L variant cuts this sleeping energy consumption
by about a factor of three.

[7]: http://www.nxp.com/documents/data_sheet/LPC111X.pdf

So keystrokes provide about 600 times as much energy as you would need
to power an LPC1110-family microcontroller running a word processor.
You could write your word processor in BASIC or some other interpreted
language and it would still work fine.

More recently (I think 2015),
STMicroelectronics has released the STM32L011x3/4,
based on the Cortex-M0+ core, which I think is the same one in the
LPC1110.  According to their measurements, it can run at 16MHz on
1.95 mA at anywhere from 1.65 V to 3.6 V, running code from RAM with
the flash switched off; they claim 0.95 DMIPS/MHz.  If we assume
1.8 V, this is 230 pJ/instruction, which is about 25% less than the
LPC1110.  This is according to the datasheet, “DocID027973 Rev 5”.

An interesting feature is that the STM32L011x3/4 has a “low-power run”
mode which clocks the CPU at 131 kHz at 31–120 μW (10–40 seconds per
1.3 mJ keystroke), as opposed to its normal 16MHz 3.5 mW run mode (370
ms per keystroke) and its 0.3–1 μW stop and standby modes (20–60
minutes per keystroke).  This suggests that maybe you could continue
doing less-CPU-demanding operations continuously for some time at a
lower speed, without having to pay for sleep and wakeup.
Unfortunately, the 7500 instructions guessed at above would amount to
about 57 milliseconds at this speed, a noticeable lag.

Even non-low-power CPUs are efficient enough that your keystrokes are
enough to power a word processor: [a New Scientist article from
2006][3] explains that the Pentium from 1993, Pentium Ms from 2003,
and Core Duos from 2006 all use 10 to 13 nanojoules per 32-bit
instruction, which is still about 15 times as efficient as you’d need
to be able to power a word processor from them.  The problem they have
is that you can’t put them to sleep and wake them up fast enough, so
you couldn’t actually use them for this.

[3]: http://www.newscientist.com/blog/technology/2006/08/exploding-batteries-silver-lining.html

Power consumption of other parts of the system
----------------------------------------------

But a CPU isn’t enough, by itself, to be a word processor.  You also
need some way to display the text while you’re editing it and to store
it when the machine runs out of stored energy, two functions fulfilled
by the ink on the paper of a mechanical typewriter.

You may also want external RAM, since e.g. the LPC1110 family tops out
at 8 kilobytes of RAM, which isn’t much text, even compared to what
you could keep in RAM on a Commodore 64.  A small SRAM is probably a
better bet than power-hungry DRAM, and you need to make sure to save
it to stable storage before power runs out.

### Display ###

The display is going to use more power than the rest of the system put
together.

Probably the best current option for low-power text *display* is an
E-Ink display, like the one used by the Amazon Swindle.  E-Ink can
maintain the same display for months or years without applied energy
(as evidenced by broken E-Ink screens).  [A 6" E-Ink display needs
about 750 mW during screen update][9], which takes 120ms, and that’s
for 122×91 mm at 167dpi.  Breaking that down, that’s about 190
nanojoules per pixel update, or 8100 nanojoules per updated square
millimeter:

    You have: 750 mW * 120ms / (122 mm * 91 mm * (167/inch)^2)
    You want: nanojoules
            * 187.53217
            / 0.0053324185
    You have: 750 mW * 120ms / (122 mm * 91 mm)
    You want: nanojoules/mm^2
            * 8106.6475
            / 0.00012335556

[9]: http://wiki.mobileread.com/wiki/E_Ink_display

Suppose you want to be able to display eight 20-em lines of 7-point
text on such a display, similar to a TRS-80 Model 100, since that was
a portable device that millions of reporters and other writers used on
a daily basis in its day.  (It sold six million units.)  That’s 7
points * 8 vertically and 7 points * 20 horizontally: 49mm×20mm,
similar in size to a cellphone display.  Updating the entire display
then will require almost 8 millijoules:

    You have: (7 points)^2 * 8 * 20 * 750 mW * 120ms / (122 mm * 91 mm)
    You want: millijoules
            * 7.909696
            / 0.12642711

This means that, although you can do huge quantities of computation
per keystroke, you can’t afford to update the screen on every
keystroke; you need about six keystrokes to provide enough power for a
full screen update.  You’ll have to make do with updating a small part
of the screen for incremental updates, and save full-screen repaints
for things like scrolling.

8 20-em lines of text is about 50 words (1 word ≈ 6 ens = 3 ems ≈ 3.2
ems = 160 ems/50) so 350 words per minute (a normal reading rate)
works out to 7 screen updates per minute, or just under a milliwatt
(1 mW).

(Calculating per character: that’s 250 characters in 8 lines, or 31¼
characters per line, or 1.58 mm per character, or 3.9 mm² per
character; this ends up being 31.6 μJ per character.)

Alternatively you could just make the keys six times as hard to press
as on a regular keyboard, plus a tiny bit more to power the rest of
the system.  This doesn’t sound like a great idea though.

(You can probably use a larger E-Ink display and keep your power
consumption down by updating only small parts of it.)

You can’t just cut a chunk out of a large E-Ink display; a small E-Ink
display is [Seeed Studio’s 2.7-inch e-Paper panel][10], which is 70×46
millimeters and 264x176 pixels for US$26, and can be driven by a US$24
Arduino shield.  That’s 18 28-em lines of 7-point text, about 200
words, three times the Model-100-like display I suggested above.

[10]: http://www.seeedstudio.com/depot/27-ePaper-Panel-p-1596.html

Seeed’s site suggests that this hardware needs 3.3 volts, 40mA, and 3
seconds to refresh the whole screen.  This is unfortunately 50 times
worse than the figures I got from the other site, totaling 400
millijoules for a full display redraw:

    You have: 3.3 volts * 40 mA * 3 seconds
    You want: millijoules
            * 396
            / 0.0025252525

You’d think another possible low-power display technology would be
Pixel Qi “low-power” transflective/reflective LCD developed for the
OLPC XO laptop.  Their PQ 3Qi-01 is a 235 mm × 143 mm 185 g 1024×600
display, each pixel containing three transmissive subpixels and three
grayscale reflective subpixels.  However, its power supply current is
specified as 135–228 mA at 3.3 V, depending on color (white uses 30%
more power), even aside for its 1.5 amp initial startup current and
the 83–525 mA LED backlight current.  Even the lowest power mode, 30
fps reflective, is specified as 390–480 mW.  So this device is way
outside of our power budget.  (All this is according to their
datasheet, “Doc No.: PQ001-2”, Sept 19, 2011.)

But those high-end LCDs aren’t the only possible option.  Old
cellphones used supertwist nematic (“STN”) LCD displays, which should
be less power-hungry.  In fact, I think that pixels that are turned
off on these displays don’t use any power.  The Philips PCF8833
datasheet says it can refresh a 132×132×3 display at 35.8 Hz to
227 Hz; it seems to contemplate driving an LCD at 10 V and up to 10 mA
but more normally 400 μA, but no more than 5 kΩ for each of its 132
output rows, only one of which is active at a time, which would seem
to mean 2 mA.  So it’s designed to drive a load of somewhere between
4 mW and 100 mW but probably something like 20 mW.  The chip itself
consumes about 1 mA while accessing memory, which works out to be
something like 3 mW.

So, at a rough guess, a 132×132×3 STN display without a backlight
might use 7 mW continuously, which is equivalent to the power cost of
about 37000 E-Ink pixel updates per second (at 190 nJ/pixel as above),
which means that for motion above 2 fps the STN display is more
efficient, but for slightly changing text, it’s dramatically less
efficient.

### Flash or FRAM ###

(Summary: Flash is adequate.)

You also need to be able to store data permanently, so that your novel
doesn’t get lost when you stop pressing keys for a while.  The most
reasonable electronic means for that is probably Flash, although MRAM,
PCRAM, and FeRAM (“FRAM”) and I think ReRAM and CBRAM are currently
available too and might be reasonable alternatives.

Some random PowerPoint presentation I found on the web says Flash uses
2μJ per 32-bit write and 150pJ per 32-bit read, while FeRAM uses 1nJ
for either one.  That means that a single keystroke provides enough
energy to write 5 megabytes of FeRAM or 2600 bytes of Flash.  Either
memory technology is clearly sufficient for word processing from this
point of view, but Flash is much cheaper.

(There are MSP430 microcontrollers that already use FeRAM (“FRAM”)
instead of Flash, but none of them have more than 128kiB, so none of
them are big enough to avoid needing off-chip memory for a novel.)

Some other random PowerPoint presentation puts MRAM at 5nJ per “write
energy”, compared to 0.8nJ for SRAM, but I don’t know if that’s a bit,
a byte, or a 32-bit word.

[Abarrilado compared FRAM and MRAM chips][11] and found that at 3V
(?), the FRAM chip needed 5mA to write at 33MHz and 9 μA in standby,
while the MRAM chip needed 23mA to write at 40MHz and 7 μA in standby.
I think those bus cycles are mostly being used to write one bit each,
which would give us 0.45 nJ/bit or 14nJ/32-bit to write the FRAM, or
1.7nJ/bit or 55 nJ/32-bit to write the MRAM.  However, in both cases,
he had to pay US$5 for about 32 kilobytes of storage, which means
enough storage for a novel will be expensive.

[11]: http://deltas.blog.com/2013/04/10/fram-vs-mram/

The reason people are adopting FeRAM for embedded designs is that the
write latency is lower, which lets the microcontroller go back to
deep-sleep much sooner, which cuts power consumption.  (Also, it’s
rad-hard and harder to reverse-engineer, which we don’t care about
here.)  However, in this application, we’re not under such severe
constraints of available energy.  We’re worried about milliwatts, not
microwatts and nanowatts.

Pullstrings
-----------

Another alternative to keyboard power and solar energy is a dynamo.
500 mm of pull at 50 N (about 5 kg of weight) should be within the
capacity of most biological humans, and that’s 25 J; a 50%-efficient
dynamo would reduce it to 12½ J.  At 10 mW (the power of typing at
90 wpm, disregarding potential conversion inefficiencies) those 12½ J
are 21 minutes.  If you need 30 μJ of energy to handle each keystroke
(3 μJ to run 10000 instructions on a 300 pJ CPU, 25 μJ to update the
E-Ink display, 0.5 μJ to store it in Flash, rounding up) then this is
enough energy to handle 420 000 keystrokes.

Related work
------------

enOcean has a commercial line of energy-harvesting pushbuttons, such
as their [ECO 200][14], and radio transmitters powered by them, such
as the PTM 200.  The ECO 200 consumes 2.7 to 3.9 newtons over 1.2
millimeters and produces 120 to 210 microjoules, which is about 2–5%
efficiency.

[14]: http://www.enocean.com/en/enocean_modules_928mhz/eco-200-data-sheet-pdf/

Cherry, the well-known keyboard switch company, has a similar product.

Rashi Tiwari under Ephrahim Garcia at Cornell added an
energy-harvesting device to a regular keyboard’s Enter key and used it
to flash some LEDs, I think in 2012, although they haven’t published a
paper on this, just [a YouTube video][13].

[13]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o9fq3OKdPkY

Also, T Wacharasindhu and J W Kwon 2008 J. Micromech. Microeng. 18
104016 doi:10.1088/0960-1317/18/10/104016 is “A micromachined energy
harvester from a keyboard using combined electromagnetic and
piezoelectric conversion.”  They got 42 microwatts out of the setup,
95% of it from piezoelectric conversion.  42μW/10mW is 0.4%
efficiency.

<http://responsive.media.mit.edu/wp-content/uploads/sites/5/2013/12/A-Compact-Wireless-Self-Powered-Pushbutton-Controller.pdf>
got 500 μJ per Scripto “Aim ’n Click” lighter click, but improved
circuitry could improve this substantially.

Combining sensing with generation
---------------------------------

Variable-inductance position sensors are well-known in the form of
e.g. the linear variable differential transformer, which senses the
differential voltage induced in two counterbalanced secondary windings
by a pulse or ac current through a primary between them to precisely
measure the linear position of a high-permeability core.  In this
case, though, we don’t care about precisely measuring its position;
it’s adequate to distinguish presence from absence.

If we additionally add a permanent magnet to the mechanism, every
movement of the core will generate a voltage, even without a current
through the primary.  We can distinguish that from the
higher-frequency sensing current because the core will never move
significantly within 100 ns.  So we can use a capacitive coupling to
couple the fast pulses from the sense windings through to the sensing
pins on the microcontroller, while rectifying the much slower ac
signals with a Schottky diode or four.

(Alternatively, maybe the probe lines should be the ones the power is
harvested from.)

No separate spring is needed, not even a rubber dome, if the magnet
itself acts to return the key to the up position.

If we have, for example, a keyboard matrix of six probe lines by six
sense lines (for 36 total keys), each wire runs through six coils.  I
think this means that the inductance of the other five coils will
prevent the current from rising quickly, but not the voltage.

If the key makes a full magnetic circuit when in contact with the
magnet, it should be easy to sense the initial voltage rise, since the
circuit reluctance will rise and fall precipitously as the key moves
through the 100 μm closest to the magnet, with a correspondingly rapid
change in flux density and thus a correspondingly large voltage.

The probe pulse needs to induce a strong enough current to charge the
sense pin and other parasitic capacitances.  If we assume that this is
around 50 pF and we need to charge it to 1.2 volts to be sure of
detection, this requires 36 pJ of energy; sending such a sense pulse
256 times per second on each of 6 lines requires 55 nW.  So the power
to probe the keyboard is minimal.  However, this doesn’t account for
the fact that the microcontroller needs to wake up in this case!
Somehow we need to wake up the microcontroller to generate the sense
pulse.
