I was doing some calculations yesterday about blowing holes in things
with lasers from DVD writers.  My estimate is that you can blow a
micron-diameter hole in just about anything with those 400-milliwatt
red lasers if you get them properly focused, in about a microsecond.

That would store a few gigabits in a fairly permanent way into a 3.5"
square of material, in a few gigamicroseconds, so a few kiloseconds.
This is the first long-term archival technology that I think is
feasible to do on a shoestring; a DVD-writer is a lot cheaper than a
focused-ion-beam etching machine.  One of the most appealing media to
use for this purpose would actually be old floppy discs, because the
Mylar medium is extremely chemically stable, and the oxide coating is
nice and optically absorbent, but glass or aluminum seems like it
would work fine.

An even simpler alternative that would work with metal foils or even
metal surfaces: blow holes in them using sparks from a graphite point
(of a radius on the order of a micron, about as sharp as a new
scalpel, a bit sharper than the sharpness of a razor blade) driven by
a capacitor.  However, most metals are not very stable in Earth’s
atmosphere.

Gold leaf as a medium
---------------------

Gold is an exception; it’s stable in Earth’s atmosphere.  I can buy
[100 sheets of 140mm square gold leaf][0] for AR$350 (US$20), which
works out to about 2 million square millimeters, or 100 000 square
millimeters per US$.

[0]: https://articulo.mercadolibre.com.ar/MLA-620174268-papel-oro-pan-de-oro-pdecoracion-nail-arts-pack-x-100-14x14-_JM

The data density we’re talking about here is about a megabit per
square millimeter, so 2 million square millimeters is about
250 gigabytes.  Hard disks are a bit cheaper at this point, by a
factor of maybe 4, but they weigh more and won’t last as long.

Gold and spark properties
-------------------------

Gold boils at 2970°, occupies 19.30 g/cc, and consumes 12.55 kJ/mol of
latent heat of melting and 342 kJ/mol latent heat of vaporization; its
molar heat capacity is some 25.42 J/mol/K.  At the 650-nm wavelength
of red lasers, it’s about 98% reflective, which makes red lasers kind
of a shitty way to boil it, but an arc in air deposits about 90% of
its energy at the negative electrode (the one that’s releasing
electrons and being bombarded with positive ions).  [Gold leaf can be
as thin as about 100 nanometers thick][1] or [a bit more][3], but [200
to 400 nanometers][2] and thicker is also sold.  Its molar mass is
197.0 g/mol.

[1]: https://hypertextbook.com/facts/1999/JeniferVilfranc.shtml
[2]: https://www.amazon.com/Sheets-Gold-Leaf-24-Guaranteed-Edible/dp/B00GX8RIEE
[3]: http://www.tudorcook.co.uk/forums/viewtopic.php?f=4&t=744

Gold leaf calculations
----------------------

The per-mole quantities above work out to 63.7 kJ/kg latent heat of
melting, 1.74 MJ/kg latent heat of vaporization, and 129 J/kg/K of
specific heat.  So boiling gold from something like room temperature
should take, roughly, 383 kJ/kg of heating plus the latent heats, or
2.19 MJ/kg, or 2.19 J/mg.  A cubic micron of gold weighs
19.3 picograms, so boiling it requires about 42.3 nJ.  But our gold
leaf is a fraction of a micron thick, perhaps 200 nanometers, so you
only need a fifth of that; if you get the polarity right and the pulse
quick enough, you need maybe 10 nJ per spark to blow holes in a sheet
of gold foil, or about 500 nJ per laser pulse, which would be 1¼
microseconds of 400 mW — I hope that’s fast enough to keep the heat
from conducting away.

The 250 gigabytes on 100 pages of 140-mm gold leaf would occupy,
hypothetically, some 20 microns of thickness, if you laid them atop
one another, for a volumetric density of about 10 exabits per cubic
meter or 10 gigabits per cubic millimeter.  But you can't do that
because they would cold-weld together and then you wouldn't be able to
separate them in order to read a particular page.

Gold is kind of a worst-case material in some ways — you lose a factor
of 25 or 50 compared to any substance that is reasonably emissive in
the relevant wavelength range, and it has very high thermal
conductivity.

Nearly any other material will be a factor of 2 or more less dense,
boil at a factor of 2 lower temperature, and have a factor of 10 or
higher emissivity, have similar or lower heat of vaporization, and
have worse thermal conductivity, so will be easier to blow holes in.
Even aluminum has a third lower thermal conductivity of gold, though
it has higher heat of vaporization.
