I think I might have a solution to the problem of rapidly deflecting
light beams through large angles under electronic control, using a
plano-convex lens and a plano-concave lens, which translate relative
to each other — or, rather, an array of each, like the surface of a
lenticular 3-D image.  Then you can get large light deflections out of
submicron movements.

The problem of electronically rapidly deflecting light
------------------------------------------------------

One of the problems I’ve frequently confronted — in, for example, file
`bokeh-pointcasting`, file `photodiode-camera`, and file
`ccd-oscilloscope` — is how to rapidly change the direction of light
beams, such as laser beams.  This is a standard problem, and Michelson
and Morley’s 19th-century solution to it — a prismatic mirror spinning
on an air bearing — led to new measurements of the speed of light and
is used today in, among other things, supermarket scanners and laser
printers.  (I think it also led to the modern dentist’s drill.).
However, the spinning mirror has a lot of momentum, so while the
movement is very predictable, it is not very controllable.

Modern laser light shows confront this problem with “laser galvos”,
descendants of the old instrument for measuring small currents — a
galvanometer connected to a mirror rather than a needle.  These are
used in pairs, one for X dflection and one for Y deflection.  Galvos
for laser shows are rated in “kpps”, thousands of points per second,
and a few tens of kpps is typical.

Contrast this with the electron gun in a CRT.  High-end mass-market
CRT computer monitors in the early 2000s supported 1200 scan lines at
a 72 Hz refresh rate, meaning that even with magnetic deflection, they
could scan the electron beam across the screen in a sawtooth-wave
pattern at 86 kHz.  Analog oscilloscopes, using electrostatic
deflection, routinely managed 20 MHz vertical deflections with 3 dB
attenuation; high-end ones could reach 100 MHz.  To look at it a
certain way, that’s 200 000 kpps.

The limitation on galvos is that mirrors have mass, which makes it
harder to move them.  If you try to make them smaller so that they
have less mass, you suffer from divergence problems, where focusing
the laser beam onto a smaller mirror narrows the beam waist and
induces beam spreading through diffraction.

This is a serious problem: light can change direction in femtoseconds,
and it’s easy to switch electricity in nanoseconds, but changing the
direction of light with electricity takes microseconds.  Isn’t there
any way to get that number down to hundreds of nanoseconds or better,
without suffering milliradians of divergence?

Well, there are lots of things that might work, like Kerr cells and
dynamic LCD holography and ultrasonic gratings and whatnot, but I
think I’ve found a good one.

Neutral meniscus lenses
-----------------------

     _
    )_)

A meniscus lens is concave on one side and convex on the other; it can
be designed concave, convex, or neutral, so that collimated on-axis
light entering the convex side comes out still collimated on the
concave side.  The exiting light is brighter and does not cover all of
the lens; this effect gets stronger as the lens gets thicker, reaching
a singularity when the lens thickness is the focal length of the
convex side and, in the geometric-optics approximation, the light
would come out in an infinitely thin pencil.

The sliced neutral meniscus lens
--------------------------------

Take a neutral meniscus lens that is thick enough to be sliced along a
flat plane parallel to its curved surfaces without interrupting either
surface, and slice it in this way, dividing it into a plano-convex
lens and a plano-concave lens.  Separate the two halves by just enough
air or oil to equal the delay of the glass removed.  Aside from the
stray light reflections at the new surfaces, this compound lens still
behaves precisely as before, leaving collimated light collimated, but
making it brighter.

         __
  ----/|| /
     | |||----
  ---|-|||----
     | |||----
  ----\||_\

However, if we slide the two halves relative to each other, retaining
flat-surface parallelism and distance, the collimated light exiting
will change direction.  If we slide the plano-concave half up, for
example, the light passing through the center of the plano-convex
lens, previously not deflected at all, now finds itself exiting just
below the center of the plano-concave half, and so is refracted
slightly down.  The light a little above it enters the plano-convex
lens and is refracted down, but exits through the center of the
plano-concave lens, continuing its trajectory parallel to the other
beam.

The beam remaining collimated depends on the deflection being linear
with off-axis distance, and this linearity is not perfect.  I think
it’s pretty good over ±30°, though, especially if the lens system is
thick enough.

Microlens arrays
----------------

Consider the case where instead of one lens we have many, like two
layers of that lenticular plastic covering that covers those 3-D
parallax Jesus cards, except that the lenslets on one of them are
concave:

         __
  ----/|| /
     | |||----
  ---|-|||----
     | |||----
  ----\|| \
  ----/|| /
     | |||----
  ---|-|||----
     | |||----
  ----\|| \
  ----/|| /
     | |||----
  ---|-|||----
     | |||----
  ----\||_\

This exhibits the same direction-changing behavior over the same angle
with the same displacement as the single lens, but can handle a great
deal more light.

You could fabricate this with little hexagonal lenslets in two
dimensions, so that you can slide the two sheets relative to each
other in two dimensions and deflect light on two axes, or you could
fabricate it as two prismatic solids with complicated profiles
amounting to many concatenated “cylindrical” lenses, like the typical
3-D lenticular parallax Jesus cards, and get only one dimension of
displacement.

How fast can you move a thing?  Tens of microseconds if it’s 100 mm
-------------------------------------------------------------------

How fast is the speed of sound in glass?  I think it’s around
3000 m/s, though I can’t remember.  Suppose you have a 100-mm-wide
sheet of these lens things and you give it a shove on one edge,
parallel to its surface, say with a piezoelectric actuator.  That
shove produces a sound wave that bounces back and forth through the
glass about ten times before the whole thing has settled, in about
30 μs, if my guess about the speed of sound is right.

This sounds dismayingly slow, but I don’t think the picture is that
bleak.  It’s true that you have *latency* in the tens of microseconds,
but it’s very consistent, predictable latency.  You can inverse-filter
for the phase delay.  XXX what about variation across the sheet while
it’s strained?  Just turn the laser off except at key moments?

(You might also be able to improve the situation with some acoustic
impedance matching: some kind of matched resistance on the other side
of the glass sheet that absorbs the shock and keeps it from bouncing
back.)

How small can you make the lenslets?
------------------------------------

If you make the lenslets smaller than the wavelength of the light in
question, they won’t work at all.  I think the variation in phase
delay needs to be about half a wavelength from the center of the
lenslet to its edge.  That makes me think you should be able to make
them on the order of 100 μm wide for visible light, even for fairly
shallow curvatures.

That means that the relative movements between the lenslet sheets to
get light deflections can be on the order of 1 μm.

Uncertainty
-----------

Is it possible to deal with the acoustic delay somehow?

Will the light coming out of each lenslet have a different phase delay
from the light coming out of the other lenslets?  Does this mean that
each individual beamlet will diffract on its own, giving a uselessly
large divergence?