Biological humans can most often hear about 10 octaves, from 20 Hz to
somewhere in the 10–20 kHz range, although slower pressure
oscillations can affect them.  Analogously, though they seem to be
conscious from birth, they usually cannot remember much that happened
before the age of 2 years or so.  We could say, then, that they can
perceive 6 octaves of their lifetime.

The first octave is from 2 years to 4 years.  In the first octave,
they most often learn to walk, talk, and theorize about others' minds.

The second octave is from 4 years to 8 years.

The third octave is from 8 years to 16 years.

The fourth octave is from 16 years to 32 years.  Many humans cease to
learn when they enter this octave, instead busying themselves with
trivialities.  During this octave they pass from being enslaved by
their instincts to being enslaved by their delusions and their habits.
Their brains and the rest of their bodies continue to grow, and their
peak physical and mental capacities are usually reached during this
time.

The fifth octave is from 32 years to 64 years.  This is the octave of
greatest exploitation, in which humans most often exploit their
previously-gained capabilities, which remain more or less consistent
during this time.  A few continue to develop during this time.  Nearly
all survive to the end of it.

The sixth octave is from 64 years to 128 years, although quite
possibly no biological human has yet lived beyond 122 years.  This
corresponds roughly to the human idea of “old age”; their physical and
mental capacities decline and their risk of death rises
superexponentially.  During this octave, many humans regret having
wasted their previous opportunities, and many blame others for this
and become bitter.