Reading Papanek and what's-his-name's _Nomadic Furniture_ I'm
astonished by how much they've optimized to minimize the difficulty of
cutting their furniture designs out of plywood sheets with hand tools,
rulers, and T-squares.  (Many of the designs use other materials as
well.)  If you're using laser-cutting or another automated
sheet-cutting process like CNC plasma cutting or Maslow-style CNC
routing, measuring is free; only the material and cut length, and
sometimes the cut curvature and angles, add cost.

And, cutting prototypes out of cardboard with a box cutter, I find
that indeed measuring takes an enormous amount of time, as does
precision in cutting.  An imprecise cut can be made in cardboard by
hand in a fraction of a second, while a precise cut may require a
minute.  This totally kneecaps the otherwise amazing advantages of
cardboard.  (See file `cardboard-furniture`.)

So we should expect nomadic-furniture designs optimized for digital
fabrication to look very different from those designed for 1970s
manual construction.  Maybe they would use a great deal more material,
but cheaper material (though the original _Nomadic Furniture_ or maybe
its sequel were early champions of Frank Gehry's
laminated-corrugated-cardboard furniture) or in thinner sheets.  Maybe
they would look like the fully-interlocking designs Mark Pauly's group
at EPFL have been publishing at SIGGRAPH over the last few years.

Presumably, though, you'd like to use some kind of mathematical
optimization algorithm to search for the lowest-cost design that
fulfills some kind of requirements.  The cost of fabrication might be
one part of the objective, while others might include weight, maximum
load, impact energy to withstand, rigidity, and fabrication time.
