I’ve been struggling with local-files WWW browsing in Dercuano since
its inception, and I’ve learned a few things in the process.

Android, the special shitty snowflake
-------------------------------------

As described in file `dercuano-hand-computers`, I think that probably
PDF is a more feasible solution for *delivery to* hand computers, but
I also want to do *development on* hand computers.

I can build Dercuano on Android in Termux with no difficulty,
especially now that I’ve spent the hour to port it to Python 3.
However, browsing the built HTML tree is more difficult.

Firefox Lite on Android can’t browse local files at all.  Chrome on
Android can, using the normal file:///sdcard/whatever URLs, but not
the entire filesystem.  So it’s necessary to put the files you’re
browsing in /sdcard, even if it’s “emulated”, so that the browser has
access to them.

Opening HTML files in Android from Termux with `termux-open-url` does
not work well, because it doesn’t use the file:// but rather a
content:// URL which could perhaps in theory export the whole tree of
HTML files (and CSS, and JS) but in practice doesn’t.  It’s rather
fiddly to get the correct directory in Termux if you got there via
symlinks; I’ve resorted to `termux-open-url "file://$(readlink -f
"$(pwd)")/index.html"`, though maybe there’s an easier way.

Chrome on Android is capable of saving HTML files you’re viewing,
which it does in a MIME multipart/related document.  Firefox Lite does
not deign to permit mere users such abilities.

Same-domain problems in filesystem browsing
-------------------------------------------

Normal Firefox of course can browse local file URLs; however, it has
some rather strange restrictions.
[dercuano-20190915/index.html](../index.html) can successfully load
[dercuano-20190915/liabilities/style.css](../liabilities/style.css),
which can then successfully load, for example,
[dercuano-20190915/liabilities/et-book-roman-old-style-figures.ttf](../liabilities/et-book-roman-old-style-figures.ttf),
and if you click from dercuano-20190915/index.html to, for example,
dercuano-20190915/notes/notes-on-local-file-browsing.html, it can also
load these files.  Similarly, both can load
[addtoc.js](../liabilities/addtoc.js) from the liabilities directory.
However, if you open
dercuano-20190915/notes/notes-on-local-file-browsing.html directly
(for example, by pasting the URL, launching it from the command line,
or clicking a bookmark), it can load the CSS and the JS but not the
TTF, which gets an error message about cross-origin requests in the JS
console.  So as long as you’re clicking around from the top level,
you’re fine, but entering through another path will result in a
mysterious font failure.

Chromium also fails to load the fonts under similar but not identical
circumstances.

Whatever concept of “origin” the browsers are using isn’t exported to
JS as `window.origin` or `document.domain`, which are consistently
`"null"` (a string) and `""`, respectively.

localStorage
------------

Somewhat surprisingly, both Firefox and Chromium support localStorage
from local files; Firefox, for one, seems to use the same notion of
“origin” that sometimes prevents it from loading the fonts.  In both
cases localStorage survives browser restarts.  This suggests that it
should be possible to use localStorage as a persistent cache, but it’s
not safe as the only way to store important data.

data: URLs
----------

Data URLs such as
[data:text/html,hello<script>alert('hi')%0a</script>](data:text/html,hello<script>alert('hi')%0a</script>)
are apparently not supported by Firefox Lite, but they are supported
by Android Chrome, and they support JS and base64.  Unfortunately I
don’t think there’s a way to get them to be gzipped.  This is maybe a
useful delivery mechanism for apps that can be encoded in a single QR
code (size limit: 2953 bytes without chaining multiple QR codes, which
is maybe enough for a decompressor).
