Zero-operand stack machines pack lots of operations per byte, since
each instruction is only five or six bits, but typically they need
close to twice as many fundamental operations as register machines.
This makes register “bytecode” like that of Lua less memory-dense, but
it has lower interpretive overhead.  The Mill CPU architecture uses a
“belt”, a fixed-size random-access history of the last few
instructions’ results, to eliminate the need for register machines to
specify destination registers in most instructions, but source
registers are still necessary.

Register machines have much better code density than pure
memory-to-memory machines like Chifir.  They don’t need a lot of
registers to get much better code density; at eight registers you
occasionally spill to memory, and at sixteen (like amd64) you almost
never do.

The reason stack machines use more operations is that they have to use
extra operations to get the operands into place to operate on them.
In the common case, the things you want to operate on are right on top
of the stack and are only used once, but often enough, they are not.

Implementations of stack machines often use registers — physical bits
of silicon, unless you’re doing this in software on top of a hardware
substrate that does register renaming — for the top item or two of the
stack.  You have a “TOS” register, “top of stack”, and maybe a “NOS”
register, for “next on stack”.  Then, at RTL, the effect of an
operation like `+` is something like this:

    TOS ← TOS + NOS
    NOS ← pop_overflow_stack()

The operation OVER, which pushes a copy of NOS, becomes:

    push_overflow_stack(NOS)
    TOS ← NOS

In i386 assembly, if you use %eax as TOS, %edx as NOS, and %esp to
point to the overflow stack, these become:

    plus: add %edx, %eas
          pop %edx
          NEXT
    over: push %edx
          xchg %eax, %edx
          NEXT

In a hardware implementation, the TOS and NOS registers can be
directly wired to the ALU, avoiding propagation delays from the
multiplexers that would otherwise be needed.

The basic idea
--------------

As an alternative to pure stack or register machines, you could
imagine having several alternate TOS registers, each selected for the
duration of a single instruction.  If you had four possible TOS
registers, you would need two bits in the instruction.  Maybe that
would eliminate a sufficiently large fraction of the five-bit stack
operations that it would be a win.

The circle midpoint algorithm as example code to try designs with
-----------------------------------------------------------------

Consider this Python implementation of (some variant of) the midpoint
algorithm for drawing circles:

    def mid(r):
        # `e` is always x² + y² - r²
        x, y, e = r, 0, 0
        while x > y:
            if e > 0:
                e -= x + x - 1
                assert e <= 0
                x -= 1

            yield x, y

            # For efficiency you could fold this into the above update of
            # `e` in the decrementing-`x` case.
            e += y + y + 1
            y += 1

### On a stack machine ###

If rendered more or less directly into ANS Forth, I think this comes
out as follows:

    \ `e` is always x² + y² - r²
    variable x  variable y  variable e  variable r
    : mid
        dup r ! x !  0 y !  0 e !
        begin x @ y @ > while
            e @ 0> if
                x @ dup + 1- negate e +!
                e @ 0 <= assert
                x @ 1- x !
            then

            x @ y @ yield

            \ For efficiency you could fold this into the above update of
            \ `e` in the decrementing-`x` case.
            y @ dup + 1+ e +!
            y @ 1+ y !
        repeat
    ;

Now, aside from `yield` and `assert` not existing normally, and aside
from the question of whether you should maybe refactor this into
smaller functions and maybe store the variables in a struct or
something, this Forth is a bit more memory-access-heavy than it needs
to be.  It leaves both stacks empty at the end of each line.  This is
the easiest way to write Forth, because it completely avoids the
temptation to get tricky with what you have on the stacks.

But let’s see if we can maybe make it a bit more compact by storing
*one* of its four variables on the stack.  `e`, say.  Also, we can get
rid of r, because we never use it except to initialize x.

    variable x  variable y
    : mid
        x !  0 y !  0
        begin x @ y @ > while
            dup 0> if
                x @ dup + 1- -
                dup 0 <= assert
                x @ 1- x !
            then

            x @ y @ yield

            y @ dup + 1+ +
            y @ 1+ y !
        repeat
    ;

This is a little more compact and less memory-intense.  We can go
further and store `x` on the stack underneath `e`, compacting further:

    variable y
    : mid4
        0 y !  0
        begin over y @ > while
            dup 0> if
                over dup + 1- -
                dup 0 <= assert
                swap 1- swap
            then

            over y @ yield

            y @ dup + 1+ +
            y @ 1+ y !
        repeat
    ;

This is a little opaque for my taste, but it’s not too unrealistic.
In Forth itself, we could go further and store `y` on the return
stack, but in this case I’m just using Forth as an example stack
machine that I can conveniently test code on.

The above subroutine contains 39 instructions:

* 9 immediate constants, 6 of which are `y` and the other 3 of which are 0;
* 6 memory accesses, which are 2 stores to `y` and 4 fetches from `y`;
* 2 calls to other functions (`assert` and `yield`);
* 9 stack manipulations, which are 3 `over`s, 2 `swap`s, and 4 `dup`s;
* 9 ALU operations, which are 2 comparisons, 4 `+`s and `-`s, and 3
  `1+`s and `1-`s.
* 4 control-flow instructions, consisting of two conditional jumps
  (`if` and `while`), one unconditional jump (`repeat`), and one
  subroutine return (`;`).

How big is this?

If we figure that the base instruction opcodes cost 5 bits each, the
function calls and immediate constants cost another 16 bits each, and
the jumps cost another 5 bits for the jump offset, then the total is
(+ (\* 39 5) (\* (+ 9 2) 16) (\* 3 5)) = 386 bits, or 49 bytes.  (We
could probably tweak that a bit, but it’s easy for that to amount to
overfitting to this function; instead I would argue that this is a
reasonable, if imperfect, estimate.)

### On a two-operand register machine ###

Let’s consider what it would look like in a two-operand register
machine instead.  Suppose we have registers A, B, C, D, E, F, G, and
H, so that we need three bits to specify a register operand; and let’s
say that registers A and B hold the first two arguments to a function.
Then it might look like this.

    mid:    B ^= B      ; Y; sets Y to 0 with XOR
            E ^= E
      loop:   C := B
              C -= A    ; X
              JPZ done  ; jump if positive or zero
              C ^= C
              C -= E
              JPZ else  ; skip the following if E > 0
                E -= A
                E -= A
                E++
                C ^= C
                C -= E
                C := ispz(C)  ; an instruction like i386 LAHF
                call assert
                A--
      else:   C := A      ; Let’s say our VM autosaves registers; it still needs
              call yield2 ; space for yield to maybe return at least one value!
              A := C      ; So we manually restore A.
              E += B
              E += B
              E++
              B++
            JMP loop
    done:   return

This is only 25 instructions, which is a lot less interpretive
overhead (although of course what matters in that case is not how many
instructions are in memory but how many are executed), but each of
them is bigger.  We’re down to only two immediate constants, we still
have three 5-bit jump offsets, and let’s suppose that our opcodes
still need 5 bits even though we don’t need stack manipulation
operations any more, and that the 3-bit register-number fields are
present even in instructions like ++ and jumps that don’t need them.
So we’re down to (+ (\* 25 (+ 5 3 3)) (\* 3 5) (\* 2 16)) = 322 bits, or
41 bytes.

(This is clashing somewhat with my experience that stack machines in
general and Forth in particular usually have very compact code,
but...)

### On a hybrid one-operand stack machine with four TOS registers ###

Now let’s suppose we have four alternate TOS registers A, B, C, and D,
and each of the machine’s primitive operations is suffixed with the
name of the register it uses for the top of stack.  We can assign A to
X, B to Y, and C to E, and suppose that our argument is passed in A.

To get a value onto the stack lower down, which is “shared” in the
sense that all the levels below the top use the same stack, we can use
dupA, dupB, and so on.

I’m supposing here that yield2 takes A and an argument from the stack
below it, and consumes them both, leaving in A whatever was below
that, and that it is careful to preserve the other registers.  To
preserve all those registers itself, it explicitly saves them onto the
stack at entry.

    : mid
        dupB dupB -B  dupC dupC -C  dupD
        begin dupA dupB dropD >D while
            dupC 0>C if
                dupA dropD dupD +D 1-D swapC -C
                dupC dupC dupC -C <=C call(assert)
                1-A
            then

            dupA dupB call(yield2)

            dupB dupB +C +C 1+C
            1+B
        repeat
        dropD dropC dropB dropA
    ;

That's 44 instructions, up from 39, and way bigger than 25, which is
kind of terrible.  This is not what I expected.  But there are no more
immediate constants, except for the call destinations.  Now it’s 44
7-bit instructions, plus two (let’s say) 16-bit call destinations and
three five-bit jump offsets: (+ (\* 44 7) (\* 2 16) (\* 3 5)) = 355 bits.
Intermediate in density (though maybe that’s only because of not using
immediate zeroes this time), but unnecessarily slow.

But the code is actually kind of fucking terrible and awkward.  It’s
easy to inadvertently clobber and super awkward to bring together two
values in two different registers.

What if we invert the idea?

### On a hybrid one-operand stack machine with 1 TOS register and 4 stacks ###

Let’s suppose that instead of registers A, B, C, and D, we have
*stacks* A, B, C, and D (very vaguely similar to Bernd Paysan’s 4stack
processor), which share a common TOS register.  Then we can store `x`
in, say, the TOS register (saving it to A when necessary), `y` in the
NOS of B, and `e` in the NOS of C.  Is that better?

Now we can use overB or overC to access the value at the top of stacks
B or C, or alternatively dropB or dropC if we want to discard the
value in TOS at the same time.  dupB or dupC pushes a new value onto
those stacks.

To make our lives easier, let’s store a 0 on D.

Here’s an almost certainly buggy but probably roughly correctly sized
implementation:

    : mid
        dupA  dupA -A  dupC  dupD  dropA
        begin  dupA overB >B while
            dupC 0>C if
                dupA dupA +A 1-A -C
                dupC dupD <=C call(assert)
                1-A
            then

            dupA dupB call(yield2)

            dupB dupB +C 1+C
            1+B
        repeat
        dropD dropC dropB dropA
    ;

That’s 37 instructions, all of which are 7 bits, except for the two
calls and three jump offsets; (+ (\* 37 7) (\* 3 5) (\* 2 16)) = 306
bits, or 39 bytes.

It still feels super bug-prone, since I’m trying to figure out at
which moments X is in TOS and when it’s on stack A.

This is better than the register machine, but only by 16 bits.