Suppose you have a programming system with a garbage-collected
object-graph memory where objects are type-tagged immutable vectors of
fields.  You really only need two stack-bytecode operations for the
object memory:

    NEW ( class [ val0 val1 ... -- ref )
    AT ( ref idx -- val )

Here `[` is a PostScript-style stack mark for variadic function
invocation.

`AT` fetches a field value, and `NEW` creates an object containing the
given fields.  Alternatively, you could bake `idx` into AT’s bytecode
and have it always operate on `self`, the receiver containing the
executing method, and NEW could be an ordinary method call on `class`
which is implemented with magical native code.  Either way, you need
bounds-checking either at compile-time or run-time.

With a reasonable generational garbage collector, this can be the most
efficient way to do many things.  Other algorithms, however, also need
mutation, so you need a third operation to mutate fields: ATPUT.

For a Pythonish language (see file `thredsnek`) you need built-in
dict, list, int, float, and probably string classes, plus reflection,
dynamic dispatch of variadic method calls, an iterator protocol, and
exceptions; and, of course, control flow.

So a minimal OO Pythonish bytecode might need INVOKE, AT, ATPUT, VAR,
VARPUT, LIT, IF, GOTO, LOOP, [, and RET: 11 operations.  I’m not quite
sure how to implement exceptions; catch and finally blocks are rare
enough in garbage-collected languages (unlike in C++ or Rust, where
every new variable sort of introduces one) that doing it the
straightforward way with PUSHJMPBUF and POPJMPBUF opcodes might be
adequate.

An alternative block-structured design might unify method scope,
object scope, and global scope as simply being three arbitrary levels
of an arbitrary set of nested scopes, and this does have benefits to
recommend it.  However, this requires recovering at compile-time or
even run-time further information that was available in the
programmer’s mind: in particular, which blocks might become closures
(i.e. when objects are created) and which variables are captured by
those blocks (i.e. the instance variables of the implicitly created
objects).

Looking at existing bytecode may be instructive.  Here’s disassembly
of the CPython bytecode for a somewhat arbitrarily chosen Python
library function, the `difference_update` method of the deprecated
`sets` module.

    Disassembly of difference_update:
    479           0 LOAD_FAST                0 (self)
                  3 LOAD_ATTR                0 (_data)
                  6 STORE_FAST               2 (data)

    480           9 LOAD_GLOBAL              1 (isinstance)
                 12 LOAD_FAST                1 (other)
                 15 LOAD_GLOBAL              2 (BaseSet)
                 18 CALL_FUNCTION            2
                 21 POP_JUMP_IF_TRUE        39

    481          24 LOAD_GLOBAL              3 (Set)
                 27 LOAD_FAST                1 (other)
                 30 CALL_FUNCTION            1
                 33 STORE_FAST               1 (other)
                 36 JUMP_FORWARD             0 (to 39)

    482     >>   39 LOAD_FAST                0 (self)
                 42 LOAD_FAST                1 (other)
                 45 COMPARE_OP               8 (is)
                 48 POP_JUMP_IF_FALSE       64

    483          51 LOAD_FAST                0 (self)
                 54 LOAD_ATTR                4 (clear)
                 57 CALL_FUNCTION            0
                 60 POP_TOP             
                 61 JUMP_FORWARD             0 (to 64)

    484     >>   64 SETUP_LOOP              33 (to 100)
                 67 LOAD_GLOBAL              5 (ifilter)
                 70 LOAD_FAST                2 (data)
                 73 LOAD_ATTR                6 (__contains__)
                 76 LOAD_FAST                1 (other)
                 79 CALL_FUNCTION            2
                 82 GET_ITER            
            >>   83 FOR_ITER                13 (to 99)
                 86 STORE_FAST               3 (elt)

    485          89 LOAD_FAST                2 (data)
                 92 LOAD_FAST                3 (elt)
                 95 DELETE_SUBSCR       
                 96 JUMP_ABSOLUTE           83
            >>   99 POP_BLOCK           
            >>  100 LOAD_CONST               1 (None)
                103 RETURN_VALUE        

The original source code:

    def difference_update(self, other):
        """Remove all elements of another set from this set."""
        data = self._data
        if not isinstance(other, BaseSet):
            other = Set(other)
        if self is other:
            self.clear()
v        for elt in ifilter(data.__contains__, other):
            del data[elt]

Here’s a longer method, from another obscure standard library module, netrc.netrc.__repr__:

    Disassembly of __repr__:
    130           0 LOAD_CONST               1 ('')
                  3 STORE_FAST               1 (rep)

    131           6 SETUP_LOOP             137 (to 146)
                  9 LOAD_FAST                0 (self)
                 12 LOAD_ATTR                0 (hosts)
                 15 LOAD_ATTR                1 (keys)
                 18 CALL_FUNCTION            0
                 21 GET_ITER            
            >>   22 FOR_ITER               120 (to 145)
                 25 STORE_FAST               2 (host)

    132          28 LOAD_FAST                0 (self)
                 31 LOAD_ATTR                0 (hosts)
                 34 LOAD_FAST                2 (host)
                 37 BINARY_SUBSCR       
                 38 STORE_FAST               3 (attrs)

    133          41 LOAD_FAST                1 (rep)
                 44 LOAD_CONST               2 ('machine ')
                 47 BINARY_ADD          
                 48 LOAD_FAST                2 (host)
                 51 BINARY_ADD          
                 52 LOAD_CONST               3 ('\n\tlogin ')
                 55 BINARY_ADD          
                 56 LOAD_GLOBAL              2 (repr)
                 59 LOAD_FAST                3 (attrs)
                 62 LOAD_CONST               4 (0)
                 65 BINARY_SUBSCR       
                 66 CALL_FUNCTION            1
                 69 BINARY_ADD          
                 70 LOAD_CONST               5 ('\n')
                 73 BINARY_ADD          
                 74 STORE_FAST               1 (rep)

    134          77 LOAD_FAST                3 (attrs)
                 80 LOAD_CONST               6 (1)
                 83 BINARY_SUBSCR       
                 84 POP_JUMP_IF_FALSE      114

    135          87 LOAD_FAST                1 (rep)
                 90 LOAD_CONST               7 ('account ')
                 93 BINARY_ADD          
                 94 LOAD_GLOBAL              2 (repr)
                 97 LOAD_FAST                3 (attrs)
                100 LOAD_CONST               6 (1)
                103 BINARY_SUBSCR       
                104 CALL_FUNCTION            1
                107 BINARY_ADD          
                108 STORE_FAST               1 (rep)
                111 JUMP_FORWARD             0 (to 114)

    136     >>  114 LOAD_FAST                1 (rep)
                117 LOAD_CONST               8 ('\tpassword ')
                120 BINARY_ADD          
                121 LOAD_GLOBAL              2 (repr)
                124 LOAD_FAST                3 (attrs)
                127 LOAD_CONST               9 (2)
                130 BINARY_SUBSCR       
                131 CALL_FUNCTION            1
                134 BINARY_ADD          
                135 LOAD_CONST               5 ('\n')
                138 BINARY_ADD          
                139 STORE_FAST               1 (rep)
                142 JUMP_ABSOLUTE           22
            >>  145 POP_BLOCK           

    137     >>  146 SETUP_LOOP              85 (to 234)
                149 LOAD_FAST                0 (self)
                152 LOAD_ATTR                3 (macros)
                155 LOAD_ATTR                1 (keys)
                158 CALL_FUNCTION            0
                161 GET_ITER            
            >>  162 FOR_ITER                68 (to 233)
                165 STORE_FAST               4 (macro)

    138         168 LOAD_FAST                1 (rep)
                171 LOAD_CONST              10 ('macdef ')
                174 BINARY_ADD          
                175 LOAD_FAST                4 (macro)
                178 BINARY_ADD          
                179 LOAD_CONST               5 ('\n')
                182 BINARY_ADD          
                183 STORE_FAST               1 (rep)

    139         186 SETUP_LOOP              31 (to 220)
                189 LOAD_FAST                0 (self)
                192 LOAD_ATTR                3 (macros)
                195 LOAD_FAST                4 (macro)
                198 BINARY_SUBSCR       
                199 GET_ITER            
            >>  200 FOR_ITER                16 (to 219)
                203 STORE_FAST               5 (line)

    140         206 LOAD_FAST                1 (rep)
                209 LOAD_FAST                5 (line)
                212 BINARY_ADD          
                213 STORE_FAST               1 (rep)
                216 JUMP_ABSOLUTE          200
            >>  219 POP_BLOCK           

    141     >>  220 LOAD_FAST                1 (rep)
                223 LOAD_CONST               5 ('\n')
                226 BINARY_ADD          
                227 STORE_FAST               1 (rep)
                230 JUMP_ABSOLUTE          162
            >>  233 POP_BLOCK           

    142     >>  234 LOAD_FAST                1 (rep)
                237 RETURN_VALUE        

Here’s the original source code:

    def __repr__(self):
        """Dump the class data in the format of a .netrc file."""
        rep = ""
        for host in self.hosts.keys():
            attrs = self.hosts[host]
            rep = rep + "machine "+ host + "\n\tlogin " + repr(attrs[0]) + "\n"
            if attrs[1]:
                rep = rep + "account " + repr(attrs[1])
            rep = rep + "\tpassword " + repr(attrs[2]) + "\n"
        for macro in self.macros.keys():
            rep = rep + "macdef " + macro + "\n"
            for line in self.macros[macro]:
                rep = rep + line
            rep = rep + "\n"
        return rep

I feel like these two functions are relatively typical Python code.

From a few arbitrary files including the above, I disassembled about
2650 bytecodes.  The top ops are:

    LOAD_FAST (630 bytecodes),
    CALL_FUNCTION (242 bytecodes),
    LOAD_GLOBAL (238 bytecodes, usually in order to call a global),
    LOAD_ATTR (228 bytecodes, largely split between
        self attributes (preceded by a LOAD_FAST of self) and
        method calls (followed by a CALL_FUNCTION)),
    LOAD_CONST (179 bytecodes),
    STORE_FAST (150 bytecodes),
    RETURN_VALUE (132 bytecodes),
    POP_JUMP_IF_FALSE (95 bytecodes),
    POP_TOP (89 bytecodes), and
    COMPARE_OP (80 bytecodes).

These add up to 2063 bytecodes, about 78% of the total.  COMPARE_OP
makes it there because it’s a catchall for a variety of comparison
operators, including exception-matching, `==`, and `is`, but also
`in`, `>`, and the like.  Most other binary operators have their own
bytecode, like `[]` (BINARY_SUBSCR, 30 occurrences), and `+`
(BINARY_ADD, 26 occurrences).

Stack operation density
-----------------------

I’ve tried a number of things, but so far I haven’t been able to find
a way to get tighter code than with a stack machine.  On average, a
binary operation (two inputs and one output) on a stack machine has
about one associated stack manipulation operation, which is typically
between 5 and 8 bits.

Typical two-register code has a 3- or 4-bit field for each operand, so
6–8 bits, and sometimes has an additional MOV instruction associated
to prevent one of the inputs from being clobbered; three-register code
avoids that at the cost of a third operand field, which in extreme
cases (like Lua bytecode) means 24 bits of operands per operation, but
is more typically 12–18 bits.

The Mill architecture’s “belt” is a third alternative; like stack
machines, the output of each instruction is implicit, but unlike them,
inputs are not consumed.  Consequently operands must be implicit.  I
did some speculative analysis (file `golomb-coded-belt`) of
variable-length encoding of a two-address belt code and found that in
the code I looked at, the spans were very nearly geometrically
distributed, so nearly the optimum was Golomb coding with a bin size
of 1, which reduces to unary coding, and this works out to a bit over
5 bits of operand information per two-operand computational
instruction (would be 4 if the geometric distribution was exactly
correct), which is essentially exactly the same code density as the
stack code, just much more expensive to decode.

(An encoding variation I haven’t explored in more detail: since about
half of the operands are the output of the immediately previous
instruction, make that implicit for two-operand instructions, and
insert an extra copy instruction in the other cases.  It probably
won’t work to improve density further, but it might.)

The TRIPS or EDGE (“explicit data graph execution”) architecture is
sort of a mirror image of the “belt”, where instruction inputs are
implicit, but outputs are explicit, and point to other instructions in
the same block.  Presumably this works out about the same.

So I think that probably stack code is the best approach; it typically
uses about 10–12 bits per binary computational operation, of which
about 5–6 bits is operand information (in the form of stack
manipulation operations), which is comparable to the other
alternatives; I'm not yet convinced that anything is better.  It’s
faster to decode and interpret than variable-length instructions,
though slower than fixed-width register-based instruction sets.  And
it easily accommodates operations that consume or produce unusual
numbers of values.

Truncation and Packing
----------------------

The F18A core in the GreenArrays GA4 and GA144 chips has four 5-bit
instructions per 18-bit memory word (when there are no jump targets;
immediate literal constants are pushed on the stack by a `@p`
instruction anywhere in the previous instruction word).  This means
two bits are missing from the last word; the instruction encoding is
designed so that among the 8 expressible instructions for this last
slot are `;` (return), `.` (nop), `dup`, `+`, and `unext` (which loops
back to the beginning of the instruction word a number of times stored
in the R register).

In this way, you can always NOP out the truncated instruction slot if
you can’t do anything useful with it, but you *can* fit many of the
most common instructions — including particularly the ones that are
most likely to be useful at the end of an instruction word.  If you
can do this ¾ of the time, you can fit 15 instructions into four
18-bit words, an average of 4.8 bits per instruction — and, as I
suggested earlier, typically you need about two instructions per
computational operation, giving 9.6 bits per computational operation,
not counting jump targets.

You could use a similar approach with 32-bit words of bytecode on a
32-bit or 64-bit machine.  If each opcode is 6 bits, for example, you
can fit 5 whole ones and one 2-bit truncated one into a 32-bit word,
or 4 whole ones and two 3-bit truncated ones.

However, jumps will use up the rest of the instruction word; the above
__repr__ example code contains 99 bytecodes, of which 4 were
`FOR_ITER` or `JUMP_FORWARD`, for an average of about 24 bytecodes
between jumps.  This is probably roughly typical, or slightly high, so
a substantial fraction of words will be taken up with such things.

I’m not counting method invocation as a jump (though it is on the
F18A), because I propose to carry it out in a different way, as
explained below about “Facets and Dispatch”.

Type tagging
------------

For a Pythonish language, we really need some kind of dynamic dispatch
that allows us to use the same bytecodes to operate on native integers
as on, for example, rational numbers.  One way to do this — the
approach CPython takes — is to make integers heap-allocated objects
too.  But it really helps performance, not to mention reliability and
timing data leaks, if ordinary integers don’t need to be stored in
memory like that.

The standard approach to support runtime polymorphism between integers
(held in registers) and pointers is to use one to four bits of the
address word as type tags.  On byte-addressed machines with four-byte
alignment for objects, the lowest two bits of a valid object pointer
are always 00, so you can set them to, for example, 01 to indicate
integers.  Then 

64-bit machines with byte-addressed memory have 

Facets and Dispatch
-------------------

Constant literals
-----------------

Static Checking
---------------
