Preliminary calculations suggest it’s feasible to build electrostatic
relays out of paper and graphite that operate reliably for millions of
cycles at frequencies from DC up to medium-wave RF, at voltages of
dozens to hundreds of volts, with individual devices that can be
clearly seen with the naked eye.  Actually this is so absurdly good on
paper that surely someone has tried it and the scheme has some hidden
fatal flaw I’m not seeing.  Details follow.

I was reading about electrostatic relays the other day.  MEMS relays
are made using nanophotolithography techniques, just like CMOS, but
have significantly different performance characteristics; they turn on
and off more slowly than MOSFETs do, but once they’re active, they
pass signals with lower resistance and thus higher speed; and they
don’t have a linear region the way MOSFETs do, having near-infinite
gain at their transition point.  Careful circuit design can get
circuits with comparable performance.

The idea of an electrostatic relay might seem paradoxical: wouldn’t
you need a higher “gate voltage” to turn it on and off than what it
can switch?  The solution taken by the MEMS designs is very simple:
the contact area is small, and the signal conductor is narrow, while
the gate area is large.  (They are insulated from one another with a
layer of amorphous silicon dioxide.)  Because the contact area is
small, the electrostatic force generated by the signal being switched
is proportionally small, perhaps two orders of magnitude smaller than
the force generated by the larger-area gate.

Other solutions are possible, involving things like leverage to allow
a smaller electrostatic force to outwrestle a larger one, but just
using larger and smaller plate areas is simple enough.

It occurred to me that you could build such devices macroscopically,
or mesoscopically (with, say, a characteristic dimension of 100μm to
1mm rather than 10mm or 1μm) out of paper and foil.  The most obvious
conductors to use, aluminum and copper, are not very suitable for
relay contacts for operation in air — sparks at the contacts will
produce hard, nonconductive oxide layers which will make the relays
unreliable in short order.  Reasonable alternative contact materials
include gold (reduces its oxide), silver (has a conductive oxide),
graphite (has gaseous oxide), tin (has a semiconducting oxide), and
lead (has conductive metallic dioxide).

Typical electromagnetic relays are good to only about 10k to 100k
operations, although high-reliability mercury-wetted reed relays
sometimes advertise a million.  These electrostatic relays should be
able to last many times longer through the use of more appropriate
materials, much lower circuit inductance, and much lower currents.
But this is speculative.

Spring materials might be trickier.  Paper might work okay at least
for prototypes, but ideally you’d like something that doesn’t creep or
fatigue over time.

A 3mm×3mm paper foil relay might consist of a 100μm-thick square of
aluminum foil on the gate side (this is conservative; common household
foil is 22μm, while ribbon-microphone aluminum-leaf is 0.6–2μm),
attracted toward a 100-μm-thick square on a substrate paper, which has
a 100-μm-thick insulating paper layer (again, conservative; ordinary
80 g/m² office paper is this thick, but 80-μm 60 g/m² paper is easily
available) separating it from the traces being bridged, which might
each have a 1mm×1mm contact area.  Actually you probably only need one
such area, but let’s keep it simple.  The moving gate might move by
100μm to bring the contacts into contact.

Our 3mm × 3mm sheet works out to be more like 5mm × 5mm including
quiet zones around it:

    EE EE EE EE EE
    EE AA AA AA EE
    DD BB CC BB DD
    EE AA AA AA EE
    EE EE EE EE EE

Here the different pixels have stacked-up contents as follows when the
contacts are open, with "G" being the gate electrode, "." being air,
"I" being insulating paper, "C" being the contact material, "N" being
the channel conductor (for example, copper), and "S" being the
substrate electrode, which can be aluminum or copper or whatever.

    AA:   BB:   CC:   DD:   EE:

    GGGG  GGGG  GGGG  ....  ....
    IIII  IIII  IIII  ....  ....
    ....  CCCC  NNNN  ....  ....
    ....  ....  ....  ....  ....
    ....  CCCC  ....  NNNN  ....
    IIII  IIII  IIII  IIII  IIII
    SSSS  SSSS  SSSS  ....  ....

If each of these layers is 100μm thick, which seems plausible, we have
500μm between the gate and the substrate at the point where we want to
activate the thing.  The total moving mass is about 0.9 mm³ of
aluminum gate (about 2.4 mg) plus a similar volume of paper (about 0.9
mg) plus 0.3 mm³ of channel (say, another 1 mg, depending on what you
make it from) for a total of 4.3 mg.  You want to somehow hinge or
spring it so that the paper spring restoring force is large comparable
to the weight of the 4.3 mg (so it won’t fail from being upside down)
but not too enormous.  How much electrostatic force can we expect?

Say we run the thing on 200V, since it’s an electrostatic device and
those have always required a fair amount of EMF to do anything.
Coulomb’s law F = k(q₁q₂)/r² tells us that two 1-nanocoulomb point
charges 500 μm apart will generate a 36-millinewton force.  But how
much charge do we have at 200 volts?  If our capacitance C = εA/d and
our ε is ε₀ — probably a good approximation for paper, and an
excellent one for air — our capacitance is 0.160 pF, so we have about
32 picocoulombs on each foil, giving about 1.12 mN, under whose
influence the relay will snap shut at initially 259 m/s², about 26
times the acceleration of gravity, which is in the right ballpark.  It
might even be possible to use lower voltages like 48V or 24V.

> <https://www.hindawi.com/journals/jchem/2017/4909327/> may be
> relevant; on a single sheet of notebook paper (probably 80 μm?) the
> dude got 53 pF/cm², so 0.53 pF/mm² (?), which is in pretty close
> agreement with what I calculated above for the larger plate
> separation encountered in an electrostatic relay.

(I think we can neglect the electrostatic force of the channel since,
as I said above, we can make it almost arbitrarily narrow.)

Neglecting the spring force, which I think can be substantially
smaller than the electrical force, we have in theory an operational
speed of around 2 μs, which in theory requires about a 16 μA charging
current — though the capacitance will increase by 20% by the time the
contacts come into contact, generating additional charging current and
electrostatic force.

At currents and voltages like these, resistances below a few hundred
kilohms will have no effect, so you might as well use graphite for all
the conductors, rather than trickier and heavier metal foils.
(Silver’s resistivity ρ is 1.59×10⁻⁸ Ωm, copper’s 1.68×10⁻⁸, gold’s
2.44×10⁻⁸, aluminum’s 2.82×10⁻⁸, lead’s 2.2×10⁻⁷, amorphous carbon’s
5–8×10⁻⁴, and graphite’s 2.5–5.0×10⁻⁶ perpendicular to the basal
plane.  So a 100μm×1mm×3mm trace of randomly oriented graphite
particles in good contact might contribute as much as
10⁻⁵Ωm×3mm/1mm/.1mm = 0.3Ω, six orders of magnitude too small to
matter.  This suggests in some sense that you could narrow the channel
by six orders of magnitude, down to 1nm, before its resistance became
important, but that is of course impractical.)  Also, you probably
want to avoid sharp corners to avoid ionizing the air or the paper.

Actually reaching such high frequencies might require you to
extensively perforate the paper (without bridging the contacts on the
two sides) or operate the whole device in a vacuum to avoid air
resistance.

### Scaling laws ###

If you scale the device down by a factor N, its area
diminishes by N² while its plate separation diminishes by N, so the
capacitance, the charge per volt, decreases by N.  At the same time,
though, the Coulomb force per nanocoulomb increases by N², so the
force per volt *increases* by N.  The mass that must be moved
decreases by N², so the acceleration per volt increases by N³, so the
time to cover a given distance decreases by N√N.  And the contact
separation distance also decreases by N, which, with the same
acceleration, would give you a √N speedup.  So you actually get an N²
speedup, in a vacuum.  Maybe more in the real world.  Or less.

[XXX shouldn’t the mass decrease by N³, not N²?]

This suggests that, with crepe paper or Mylar or glass foil or
something, you should be able to reach well into the megahertz with
devices that are still individually visible to the naked eye, although
perhaps a bit tricky to construct by hand.

If you decrease the voltage, you get proportionally less force, and
need proportionally less charge.  This means that the characteristic
resistances stay the same, but in some sense the amplification factor
drops.  Although, like CMOS, these devices are capacitive loads,
though very small ones; they have gain limited only by the leakage
current, in this case further potentiated by the additional extremely
high factor of gain at the threshold voltage between barely contacting
and barely not contacting.

### Multipole relays ###

In the above diagram, the vast majority of the area is occupied by the
gate electrode; the channel occupies only a small part of the device.
It might be worthwhile to run two or three channels across it to
amortize the expense of the large gate over more channels.  As
calculated above, the channel itself doesn’t reach a significant
resistance at these voltages and currents until it’s only 1nm wide
(and 100μm tall, making it more like a graphite wall than a graphite
trace, so maybe reducing it to 30μm × 30μm would be more reasonable).
So you could run many channels across, controlling them all with a
single gate voltage, and thus get many bits of switching out of a
single device.
