A thought that occurred to me as I read about the [LMI K-machine][0]’s
duplicated register file:

[0]: http://fare.tunes.org/tmp/emergent/kmachine.htm

Suppose you are executing a 32-bit 3-address instruction with three
8-bit register fields.  As a possible alternative to having 256
registers (or a smaller register field), you could have 8 registers,
one bit in each register field identifying some subset of the
registers to use.  For example, you could specify 00001000₂ to
indicate register 3, or 01000000₂ to indicate register 6.  In the case
where you specify more than one register to write to, the results are
written to all specified registers; 11111111₂, for example, writes to
all 8 registers, and 00000000₂ discards the result.

A perhaps more reasonable design here is to have an output register
field that is twice the length of the input register fields, each of
which can address only one half of the register space, thus
eliminating the necessity for a multi-ported register file.  For
example, you could have 6 bits per input register field and 12 bits of
output register field.  If the two halves of the output register field
were always identical, it would look like a machine with 6 registers
and the usual dual-ported register file, just with an inefficient
instruction encoding.

Presumably the results when you select more than one input register
should be specified; for example, wired-AND or wired-OR would be
reasonable.  Wired-OR has the advantage that 000000₂ produces 0, which
is more commonly useful than the -1 that would be produced in the
wired-AND case.  This also, of course, eliminates any necessity for an
OR instruction.

12 registers in this form would probably be about as comfortable as 8
registers in the more usual form.