If a house is sufficiently insulated, it need not actively reject heat
outdoors, for example with air conditioners.  It is sufficient to
store the heat generated within by the inhabitants and their devices
(lights, appliances, etc.) in a seasonal thermal store until the
environment is cool enough for the heat to flow to it passively, given
the opportunity.

What’s the worst-case scenario?  One person dissipates around 2000
kcal/day, about 100W.  Household appliances are usually a few times
this; let’s say 400W in total.

Let’s suppose we store cold in the form of ice during the winter, and
that it will have to last six months.

400 J/s · 6 months · 30 days/month · 86400 s/day = 6.2208 GJ

Melting ice consumes 75 kcal/kg.

6.2 GJ/person · (1/75) kg/kcal · 4.2 cal/J = 0.35 Gg/person = 350 Mg/person

350 tons of water: 350 m³, a little more due to the expansion of ice.
At a height of 5 m, that would be 70 m²: basically a bedroom or two of
space.  Or, if it were below an entire floor of 16m × 16m = 256 m²,
it’d be 1½m of height of ice.  Per person.  If four people live in the
house, it’ll be 6 meters of depth of ice below the house — 1 meter per
month.

If we’re talking about storing cold in a material without a change of
phase, we’d have just 20° or 30° of ΔT, which is 20–30 kcal/kg, if it
were water, or 7–20 kcal/kg if it were something else — in total 4× to
10× the ice, by weight — 1400 to 3500 tons per person.  Nevertheless,
it could be a similar volume of rock or soil, since they are some 2×
to 4× as dense as ice.

In practice, it’s probably possible in most places to radiatively
couple to a comfortable temperature almost every day, so a six-month
thermal store is extreme overkill.  However, these calculations show
that even a six-month purely passive thermal store is feasible.