High-speed cameras are a crucial sensor technology for a variety of
purposes, including high-speed robotics with camera feedback (see file
`starfield-servo` and file `v-plotter-servo`) and analysis of
high-speed physical events, such as breaking glass or basically
anything solid objects do on the micron scale or below.  But existing
high-speed cameras, based on CMOS and CCD sensors, are expensive and
sometimes hard to get for other reasons.

How about photodiodes for faster, cheap camera focal planes?

Photodiodes
-----------

Cheap photodiodes can be astoundingly fast compared to a typical
camera sensor.  The Fairchild QSD2030 5-mm IR photodiode has
5-nanosecond response time, passes 25 microamps at 0.5 mW/cm^2 and 5
volts, and 10 nA dark current (at 10V); it costs 53 cents at Digi-Key.
The OSRAM SFH 2701 infrared photodiode (400-1050 nm) passes 1.4
microamps under the same conditions, and boasts 2-nanosecond response
times, for 95 cents (48 cents in quantity 100).

In the subnanosecond range, prices do start to heat up, because you're
getting into avalanche photodiodes and silicon photomultipliers; the
Marktech MTAPD-07-003 infrared avalanche photodiode (which can detect
down to 400 nm, though at 600 nm its responsivity is already cut in
half) is specified for a 300 picosecond rise time, and it claims 35-50
microamps at one microwatt of incident light (on its
230-micron-diameter sensor --- though this may be an error and maybe
it should be 0.35 to 0.50) and less than 400 pA of dark current
(though "typical" is 50 pA).  It costs US$22.  (Advanced Photonix,
Excelitas, ON Semiconductor, and Opto Diode are four other vendors.)

Possible camera designs
-----------------------

### Matrix focal plane ###

But at the 2-nanosecond prices you could quite reasonably put together
a 16x16 focal plane of fast photodiodes and get a 256-pixel image at
500 million frames per second, although it's challenging to amplify
and digitize the data that fast, and your RF signal integrity design
needs to be high-quality, with carefully matched stripline or
something.

### Pushbroom focal planes ###

Maybe more interesting, you could put your 256 photodiodes in a
*column* instead of a matrix, then scan them across the image
horizontally, for example using a spinning mirror like the kind used
in the Michelson-Morley measurements of the speed of light, in
supermarket scanners, and in laser printers.  Spinning at 30,000 rpm
like a Dremel tool, an eight-sided spinning mirror could scan 4000
times per second; perhaps a separate stationary mirror or two could
multiply that by 2 or 4.  Air bearings can manage perhaps three times
higher speeds than that.

You do suffer a loss of light-gathering capacity, because unless your
camera is kilometers long, there's nowhere to store the light that
gets reflected to the left or right of the photodiode array; it just
gets lost.  Light-gathering capacity is extremely important at these
speeds.

However, note that this provides an only sort of mediocre frame rate,
but a sort of excessively horizontal resolution, limited by the mirror
speed: 500 million pixels per second per photodiode, divided by 4000
scans per second, gives you 125000 pixels horizontally, but still only
256 pixels vertically.  Something more like 512 pixels horizontally
and a million frames per second would be a much better compromise.

Maybe a bunch of stationary mirrors, or more facets on the spinning
mirror, can increase the number of horizontal scans per second, at the
expense of a very narrow field of view.  But maybe you start running
into diffraction problems with mirror edges.

### Staggered pushbrooms ###

If there's no diffraction problem with mirror edges, though, there's
an alternative to sacrificing field of view.  You increase the number
of mirror facets as before, but you organize the photodiodes in
several rows, as in the mirrorless 16x16 matrix --- but this time with
a large empty horizontal space between columns, such that the narrow
fields of view of the various columns, produced by the spinning
mirror, nearly overlap, giving you back a wider field of view.

Is there in fact a diffraction problem?  If we want our mirror facets
to be at least 7 microns wide, we can fit almost 4500 of them around
the circumference of a 10-mm-diameter mirror; this could give you a
bit over 2 million scans per second.

### Alternative camera scanning mechanisms ###

Perhaps instead of a spinning mirror you could use an electro-optical
Kerr cell or Pockels cell with a voltage gradient from one side of it
to the other, thus obtaining much quicker response times but smaller
deflection angles.  Alternatively you could physically move a mirror
with a piezoelectric stack actuator like those used for
adaptive-optics telescopes; many of these actuators have reasonable
response at frequencies up into the megahertz, so sinusoidally
scanning a mirror over a small angle at such frequencies should be
feasible.

Time-domain sparkle sensors
---------------------------

However, for applications like those described in file
`starfield-servo`, the 16x16 matrix could be very useful --- not for
motion video made of frames, but for measuring with high precision the
times at which each sparkle begins to impinge on each camera pixel.
This should provide