Straightforward PDM (Pulse Density Modulation) is basically the
Bresenham line drawing algorithm --- you bump up an error counter by
the desired slope every iteration, and when that error counter hits a
threshold, you move to the next discrete row of pixels on the display,
and subtract from the error counter.  Like this:

    error_counter += desired_slope * 2 * threshold;
    output_value = (error_counter > threshold);
    if (output_value) error_counter -= 2 * threshold;

As `desired_slope` increases from 0 to 1, the duty cycle of
`output_value` (which is always either exactly 0 or 1) likewise
increases from 0 to 1.  (And of course in practice you probably want
to store `desired_slope * 2 * threshold` in a variable,
i.e. prescaling `desired_slope`.)  To draw a line, you add or subtract
`output_value` to your X or Y coordinate, and always increment or
decrement the other coordinate, according to which octant the line is
in.

One potential problem with this for, say, audio applications, is that
it adds an artifact: a high-power pulse train at a single high
frequency, and that frequency can potentially be fairly low; it's
highest when you're using PDM to produce a 50% duty cycle, at which
point you have a square wave at a frequency of half the "sampling"
frequency.  At 25% or 75% duty cycle, the fundamental frequency dips
to a fourth of the sampling frequency, which is to say two octaves
lower; at more extreme duty cycles, the frequency drops reciprocally.
At a 1% or 99% duty cycle, your artifact frequency is 100 times lower
than your sampling frequency, more than six octaves lower.

In an environment that can produce subharmonics, for example due to
aliasing, even artifacts too high in frequency to perceive can become
disturbing by producing strong perceptible subharmonics.  Pixel
line-drawing is actually just such an environment: lines that cross
one another interact nonlinearly, and it's easy for the high-frequency
jaggies of Bresenham line-drawing to alias down into large-scale moiré
patterns.

But, ideally, in the PDM case, you keep this artifact frequency high
enough that you can filter it out easily, restricting the available
duty cycles if necessary, in the analog domain if that's where you're
ultimately sending the pulse train.  But you may not be able to
achieve that.  Alternatively, you could *spread* the artifact out so
that it's less problematic, making it more closely resemble white
noise:

    error_counter += desired_slope * 2 * threshold;
    output_value = (error_counter > threshold + r * drand());
    if (output_value) error_counter -= 2 * threshold;

Here `r` is a parameter that controls how much bandwidth the artifact
noise is spread over.  At `r == 0` you have exactly Bresenham
line-drawing, and as `r` grows to `threshold` the artifact noise gets
spread over, I think, an entire octave, and I think grows slightly.
If `r` grows further, it will *increase* the total artifact noise, but
it might still become less obtrusive up to some point, by virtue of
having lower spectral density.

I suspect that you could probably produce nearly-telephone-quality
audio this way with a "sample frequency" of only about 30kHz and an
`r` of about `threshold`, giving you a sort of "shaped dither"
spreading the 1-bit quantization noise over the upper octave or so of
human hearing, where we're relatively insensitive.  A 100Hz wave would
have 150 cycles positive and 150 cycles negative, so you'd have only
at best an ENOB of about 8, and less for higher frequencies; but as
long as the quantization noise stuck strictly to an annoying
high-frequency hiss, that might not be so bad.  By comparison, a
25%-to-75%-duty-cycle pure-PDM at the same sample rate would on
occasions produce a high-power frequency-modulated whistle as low as
7.5kHz, which would be extremely noticeable; and an equivalent 7-bit
PWM would use a fundamental frequency of 30kHz/128 = 234Hz, right in
the heart of the sounds you're trying to reproduce, making it almost
completely unusable.

If you're doing this on a microcontroller, such as an Arduino, you
might be extremely interested in how many clock cycles the above code
needs, since if the timer ISR you're running it in takes too long, you
have to lower the sample rate further in order to have time to run
other code.  The basic 8-bit Bresenham PDM code is something like

       r1 := ram[error_counter]
       r2 := ram[scaled_desired_slope]
       r1 += r2
       ram[error_counter] := r1
       jump_if_overflow 1f
       io[output_pin] := 0
       reti
    1: io[output_pin] := 1
       reti

using the wraparound carry to implicitly subtract `2 * threshold`.
The overflow bit (assuming you have an overflow bit) gets set when the
byte overflows from positive to negative.  If you only have a carry
bit (are there CPUs with only a carry bit?), you can use that instead
by initializing `error_counter` to the most negative number
(e.g. -128) instead of zero.

(As a side note, I don't know why this logic isn't embedded as a
PDM-generation circuit in microcontrollers.)

I think that's about 8–16 clock cycles on a RISC machine, so on an
Arduino you could probably up to do 1MHz or 2MHz, or more if you can
reserve a couple of registers for the ISR so it doesn't have to access
RAM.  Another three cycles would give you 16-bit `error_counter` and
`scaled_desired_slope` values, and maybe something approaching
CD-quality audio:

       r1 := ram[error_counter]
       r2 := ram[error_counter+1]
       r3 := ram[scaled_desired_slope]
       r4 := ram[scaled_desired_slope+1]
       r2 += r4
       r1 += r3 + carry_bit
       ram[error_counter] := r1
       ram[error_counter+1] := r2
       jump_if_overflow 1f
       io[output_pin] := 0
       reti
    1: io[output_pin] := 1
       reti

Adding the random diffusion is probably best done on the Arduino,
which has a two-cycle hardware multiplier, with a linear congruential
generator whose results are right-shifted to the proper scale.  The
LCG probably needs at least 16 bits, so you need at least four 8-bit
multiplies and four 8-bit additions, an additional 12 cycles.
However, this is not the end of it; the comparison complicates things
somewhat, because we can no longer depend on a single test of a carry
bit.  Probably it's best to restrict the `error_counter` range to a
subset of its possible values, requiring an actual conditional
subtraction, and use an actual subtraction for the threshold test.

If you're thus limited to, say, 300kHz, then at 30kHz you'll be using
10% of the microcontroller's compute cycles for the audio PDM.

(Hmm, I should probably try this out with Python programs generating
WAV files before I worry too much more about its efficiency...)
