Range literals
--------------

Python syntax and semantics, considered as executable pseudocode, has
a curious wart relating to ranges of numbers.  Because it’s so common
to store data in arrays in Python (called "lists"), this wart comes up
often.

This is: if we want to iterate over the numbers 1 to 15 (excluding
15), we have to write:

    for i in range(1, 15):
        ...

But if we want to do something `f` with the corresponding elements of
an array `arr`, we must write:

    f(arr[1:15])

It’s possible to store the object encapsulating those indices from 1
and 15 in another object and pass it to `arr` later.  You would think
you would do it like this, like in Octave:

    idx = 1:15
    f(arr[idx])

but actually that’s invalid syntax and you have to do it like this:

    idx = slice(1, 15)
    f(arr[idx])

This syntax and function names are far from self-explanatory.  Far
better, in terms of readability, would be to write this:

    for i in 1:15:
        ...

Or even this:

    for i in (1:15):
        ...

And, in terms of consistency, it would be far better for the
expression syntax within `[]` to be the same as the expression syntax
outside of them.  This would speed up the learning of Python.

This is one of the few obstacles to universally using Python in place
of more traditional pseudocodes in the explanation of algorithms.  As
things are now, it is much clearer to write the traditional:

    for i = 1 to 14
        ...
    end for

than the Python

    for i in range(1, 15):
        ...

This proposed universality of the slice syntax would simplify this,
although you'd still have to explain that `1:15` doesn't include 15.

You could maybe make the argument that the extra redundancy improves
the Python interpreter's error-reporting ability.  That is, there are
some cases where someone might accidentally write a range literal, or
something like one, which would currently be a syntax error, which
would give you a less clear syntax error or even broken code.  I can
think of a few possibler cases of this — when you want to iterate over
an infinite range, for example:

    for i in 2::
        ...

Or worse:

    for i in ::
        ...

I think these can be basically solved by always requiring parens
around the range literal, as is currently done with generator
expressions, with the added looseness that the parens can also be
square brackets:

    for i in (2:):
        ...
    for i in (:):
        ...

Negative indexing
-----------------

Python's array indexing has an additional semantic wart, shared with
Perl and I think originally from APL, which is that the use of
negative indices counts from the end of the array.  This has
occasionally worsened bugs in my Python code, but mostly it's just
unnecessarily mysterious for newcomers to Python.

I think a better approach would be to have a special object, called,
say, `end` or `last`, which can have integers subtracted from it to
produce indices that are interpreted to mean "N from the end".  You
wouldn't be able to iterate directly over ranges containing it, but
that's not really a problem.

So, for example, you could say:

    while line.endswith("\n") or line.endswith("\r"):
        line = line[:end-1]

which I think is clearer than the current real Python code for doing
this.  But you couldn't say:

    for i in (:end-1):
        print line[i]

This would also eliminate the need for omitted indices in slices.
Rather than `arr[:]`, you could write `arr[0:end]`, at a slight cost
in verbosity but a great gain in clarity, at least to my eyes.

Greek letters
-------------

JavaScript allows you to use Greek letters in your variable names,
which lets you write code like this (from
<http://canonical.org/~kragen/sw/dev3/spirals.html>):

    var Δθ = 1/r/2
      , Δr = slope * Δθ
    ;
    if (Δr > 0.5) {
      Δr = 0.5;
      Δθ = Δr / slope;
    }
    if (neg) Δθ = -Δθ;

    r += Δr;
    θ += Δθ;

This code would be substantially wordier and less clear if it had to
be written without Greek letters, and the same is true for a
substantial amount of code that is more or less mathematical in
nature.  (You could argue that Greek letters are going to be
intimidating for people who aren’t familiar with math, but those
people are going to have to learn the math before they understand the
code anyway.)

I would argue that being able to use Greek letters in pseudocode often
improves its clarity substantially.

An example
----------

Here's a function from the scrypt paper, rendered in the traditional
ALGOLish pseudocode from the paper, though without the LaTeX
typography:

    Algorithm ROMix_H(B, N)
    Parameters:
            H               A hash function.
            k               Length of output produced by H, in bits.
            Integerify      A bijective function from {0,1}^k to {0,...2^k-1}.
    Input:
            B               Input of length k bits.
            N               Integer work metric, < 2^{k/8}
    Output:
            B'              Output of length k bits.
    Steps:
     1: X ← B
     2: for i = 0 to N - 1 do
     3:   Vᵢ ← X
     4:   X  ← H(X)
     5: end for
     6: for i = 0 to N - 1 do
     7:   j ← Integerify(X) mod N
     8:   X ← H(X ⊕ Vⱼ)
     9: end for
    10: B' ← X

Here's the Python version, with the notational improvements suggested
above:

    def ROMix(H):
        """H: a hash function producing k bits.
        Returns a function(B, N):
        B: Input suitable for H.
        N: Integer work metric, < 2**(k/8)
        returns an output of length k bits.
        Uses a bijective function Integerify from {0,1}^k to {0,...2**k-1}.
        """

        def f(B, N):
            V = [B]
            while len(V) < N:
                V.append(H(V[end-1]))

            X = V[end-1]
            for i in (0:N):
                j = Integerify(X) % N
                X = H(X ^ V[j])

            return X

        return f

I think this is substantially clearer than the original pseudocode
version, especially if you already speak Python or C.  It would be
better if the inner function `f` didn't have to be named, or if the
return statement could be placed before its definition (as in JS).
