I previously calculated (in file `fast-sea-salt-evaporator`) that the
enthalpy of vaporization of water (2.26 MJ/kg) and terrestrial mean
insolation (180–280 W/m² at temperate latitudes) make solar
evaporation a relatively inefficient method of desalination:
80–120 mg/m²/s of water.  This also makes sea salt production
relatively inefficient.  Indeed, these efficiencies are so low that
even normally abundant solar thermal energy only permits their use in
niche cases.

By comparison, the [Sorek reverse-osmosis desalination plant][0]
forces water through semipermeable membranes at 7.1 MPa, producing
drinking water at a total cost of US$0.58/kℓ.  7.1 MPa × 1 kg/ℓ is
7.1 kJ/kg, or 0.0071 MJ/kg, about 320 times less energy than the
enthalpy of vaporization.  7.1 kJ/ℓ works out to 2.0 kWh per
kiloliter, which costs between US$0.08 and US$0.24 at 4¢ to 12¢ per
kWh, current US electrical prices.  By contrast, 2.26 MJ/kg works out
to 630 kWh/kℓ, which would be US$25 to US$75 per kiloliter, compared
to Sorek’s US$0.58.  (The reason solar desalination happens at all is
that you don’t have to buy the energy.)

[0]: http://ensia.com/features/how-a-new-source-of-water-is-helping-reduce-conflict-in-the-middle-east/
<!-- is that URL missing a trailing “original”? -->

However, vaporizing water once with solar energy is a silly way to do
things.  When that water condenses, it releases its enthalpy of
vaporization again.  If you could harness that heat released in
condensation to vaporize more water, even a few stages of the process
would improve the efficiency of the system dramatically, although 17
stages would be needed to bring it closer to Sorek’s consumption.
However, 5 stages would reduce the energy consumption to 450 kJ/ℓ, or,
say, increase to 500 mg/m²/s.

A tricky problem is that you need to deliver this condensation heat
into water that is cooler than the condensing steam or water vapor,
for example by running the steam through coils cooled by water that is
evaporating.  It would be sufficient, if perhaps not necessary, for
the coolant water to be boiling — but at a lower temperature.  This
approach requires that each successsive stage of the desalination
apparatus operate at a successively lower pressure — exponentially
lower: 85 kPa for 95°, 70 kPa for 90°, 58 kPa for 85°, 47 kPa for 80°,
39 kPa for 75°.  The water thus produced needs to be pumped out of
these partial-vacuum chambers against this pressure — 62 kPa for the
75° chamber.  While this is less than 1% of the pressure used in the
Sorek reverse osmosis plant, and therefore will not add a significant
*energy* cost, it still represents machinery that adds significant
complexity to the apparatus.

I suspect that this quintuple-acting vacuum cascade approach will make
solar water distillation sufficiently more inexpensive to permit its
use in a wide variety of settings where it is currently too expensive.