Relational modeling and APL
===========================

I think there’s a kind of logic-programming or constraint-logic
approach that preserves most of what’s good about array languages,
while adding the kind of multidirectional inference languages like
Prolog and especially miniKANREN have.

I’ve noticed these notes are getting repetitive as I write down the
same ideas over and over again, having forgotten them; I’ll try to
link them here.

I was thinking about [object-oriented equational rewrite rules] and
file `funbot` today or yesterday, thinking about how it would be nice
to define properties like “.vol = π.r²·.h; .area = 2π.r(.h + .r)” so
that “foo.area” would do a search for formulas that could be applied,
and use that one if it happened that “foo” has properties .h and .r.
(I vaguely handwaved in my head that some kind of namespacing could
alias this to “foo.cylinder::h” so it wouldn’t collide with, say,
“foo.planck::h”.)  And it occurred to me that this is precisely the
same thinking in file `principled-apl` about array conformability.
(And in `views-and-ometa`, I opined that they were the same thing as
Wadler’s Views.)

[object-oriented equational rewrite rules]: http://lists.canonical.org/pipermail/kragen-tol/2007-March/000855.html

A difference, though, is that in the rewrite-rule thinking, a single
property can have multiple definitions, like methods overridden in
different OO classes, of which normally only one is applicable, while
in `principled-apl` no such merger was contemplated, except through
explicit conditionals.

In `funbot` I’d suggested resolving conflicts through a specificity
ordering, like CSS or Aardappel.  But thinking of the rewrite rule as
a *deduction rule* suggests another alternative.  Suppose we read
“.vol = π.r²·.h” as specifying an equation in the usual sense — a
relationship that is known to hold in all situations where the
variables are defined.  In that case, it defines a *constraint*, which
means that not only can we use it to compute .vol, but we can use it
to compute .h if we happen to know .vol and .r from someplace else.
That means that it’s also an *assertion* — if we have a different
computation of .vol from some other definition, the two values must
agree, or we have discovered an inconsistency in our model!

So that’s a different way of dealing with “rewrite rule”
conflicts — crash the program if two conflicting definitions give
different results.

(And Prolog, of course, considers conflicting definitions as equally
valid possibilities, though there is a definite order to them; the
second is only used if we backtrack out of the first.)

But we can get that without giving up the yumminess of implicit loops
we get in `principled-apl` (and `typed-apl` and `matrix-multiply`) by
virtue of saying something like .r = [1mm 2mm 5mm 10mm], meaning that
there are four situations of interest defined by different radii.  And
these “different cylinders” can all “inherit” a common .h, have a .h
that varies together with .r, or have a .h that varies independently
of .r.  The underlying logic is conditional deduction over various
different situations.

I talked a bit about this connection in [More thoughts on powerful
primitives](powerful-primitives.html#addtoc_12) as well.

I wrote down almost exactly these ideas two years ago in file
`relational-modeling`.

By using the more powerful kind of relational programming miniKANREN
provides, rather than the more limited kind used by Prolog, we may be
able to solve more models.  Also, for numerical relationships like the
ones I used as examples above, interval arithmetic or affine
arithmetic may be very useful for two reasons — first, in order to
make progress toward solving or proving insoluble a system that starts
out underconstrained (consider .x = exp(.x), which has no solution, or
.x = exp(.x)/4, which has two solutions), and second, for determining
whether two values of a numerical quantity reached through different
computational paths are in fact equal or not.  (Interval arithmetic
can’t prove that the values are equal, but it can reliably tell
whether an apparent difference is too big to be due to rounding
error.)

There’s a potential conflict here between the use of implicit patterns
of known values to distinguish situations where a property doesn’t
*exist*, like trying to find the radius of a cube, and where a
property *isn’t known yet*.  I suspect that there may be different
valid design choices one can make to resolve this conflict which lead
to interestingly different languages that work for different purposes.
