In 2000 I wrote about “opacity holograms” — a way to encode a large
number of two-dimensional input images into two images such that just
by passing light through them both in different directions, you can
reconstitute any of the original input images, using only geometrical
optics (i.e. no wave mechanics.)  The naïve approach to this involves
a reduction of N× in both resolution and brightness for N input
images: e.g. for 100 input images you take a hit of 99% of the
original input light intensity.  I think it’s possible to do better
than that, maybe even as far as the √N that real interference
holograms get, but I haven’t figured out how yet.

The naïve approach is something like this: on one sheet of film, leave
one transparent pixel in the center of each 10×10 pixel square; now
lay this atop another sheet of film on a lightbox.  The upper “grille”
will leave visible one out of every 100 pixels in the lower sheet, and
by sliding it one pixel up, down, left, or right, you can select one
of 100 different “pages” of information.  It’s probably more
practical, as I wrote in 2000, to permanently mount the “grille” and
the interleaved image on opposite sides of a sheet of glass.

One possible use of this is for archival information storage.  One of
the problems confronted by the design of artifacts like the Rosetta
Project’s Rosetta Disk is how to make the archived information
retrievable without advanced technology like a computer.  (Presumably
if computers survive, then so will computerized archives of our
current information.)  The unhappy compromise adopted by the Rosetta
Project is to require the reader to have a 650× microscope.

If your film is printed on a 1200dpi laser printer, then each of the
100 interleaved pages of information has 120dpi available to it — more
than enough for crisp, readable text.  In the roughly 3½×6 pixel font
I designed for laser-printed microfilm and shown in
<http://canonical.org/~kragen/bible-columns>, you’ll have 20 lines of
text per vertical inch (rather than the usual 6: effectively, a
3.6-point font), moderately readable to the naked eye; roughly ten
thousand words on a page, a dozen times the usual areal density.  The
100 pages together are roughly a million words, or a bit longer than
the Bible — on a single page.  And since each page is potentially full
color, you can do better still by encoding separate monochrome images
in red, green, and blue color channels: 3600 pages of text, readable
with the naked eye and a color filter, printable on a single pair of
pages with a regular laser printer.  With a high-resolution printer,
you might be able to get more.

I suspect that you can do better than this naïve approach by jointly
optimizing the two opacity images of the “grille” and “interleaved
image”, but I don’t know how much better.

How much separation can you get?  Ideally you’d like to spread out the
100 pages (or however many you can get) over as much solid angle as
you can, so that, for example, you don’t have to be a precise distance
from the page to see a single image, you don't switch images when your
eye saccades (moving your pupil a few millimeters), and you see the
same image from both eyes.  Let's figure that the maximum angle you
want to have to turn the page from looking at it straight on is 60°,
because at that point you've visually squished it by a factor of 2,
and more than that will impede readability.  So you have 120° of angle
that you need to divide into 10 increments, thus 12° each.  So you
want a single-pixel displacement between the two sheets (1/1200 inch,
or 21 microns) to correspond to 12°, which means you want the distance
between the sheets to be effectively about 1/sin⁻¹(12°) ≈ 5× that 21
microns: 105 microns, about a tenth of a millimeter.  This is assuming
no refraction; the refractive index reduces the necessary thickness,
and also linearizes the displacement a bit, so that the nonlinearity
of arcsin becomes less significant.

You need to make sure your pixels are big enough that geometrical
optics is a good approximation, which is to say that the pixels need
to be a lot bigger than the wavelength of light.  21 microns is
sufficiently bigger than 0.7-micron red light, and there's room for
another factor of 2 or 4 in there, which would be a factor of 4 or 16
in information density.  But 2400dpi printers are a specialty item,
and 4800dpi printers are only used for transferring CGI imagery onto
movie film, so they are much less accessible.

Alternatively, you could accept lower resolution per encoded page (and
lower light levels) in exchange for more encoded pages by making the
grille holes sparser.  This won't increase the number of words
encoded, because the font size has to be bigger, but it may make the
text easier to read by making it larger.  Perhaps a factor of 2 is
available here.

Printing transparency film on both sides is the ticket
------------------------------------------------------

Amazon has [100 sheets of laser-printable transparency film at half an
inch thick][0], or about 130 microns thick, which is in the right
ballpark.  The extra thickness (and refractive index) reduces the
viewing angle correspondingly, perhaps to 8° or so.  At a reading
distance of half a meter, that’s about 7 cm; so your two eyes will see
different pages, but each eye will comfortably see a single image
regardless of where it saccades to.

[0]: http://www.amazon.com/School-Smart-Transparency-without-Sensing/dp/B003U6KYO8/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1400705721&sr=8-1&keywords=transparency+film

Amazon’s current price on this is US$19.32, or US$0.19 per
roughly-A4-size sheet.  The material is probably cellulose acetate,
which [is not archival-quality and will degrade within a century under
most conditions,][1] through a process known as the “vinegar
syndrome”, which [poses major problems for current archival
collections][2].  It also has a refractive index of about 1.5.

[1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cellulose_acetate_film
[2]: http://anthropology.si.edu/conservation/lamination/lamination_guidelines.htm

The archival-quality substitute seems to be the now-discontinued [Type
D Mylar film][3] or [Melinex 516 or other equivalent PET film][7],
which you can apparently [etch with carbon tetrachloride to get it to
take inkjet ink][4].  Amazon has what appears to be [inkjet-printable
Mylar][5] at 36" × 125' at 4 mil thick (216μm) for US$175, but I don’t
know if it’s archival.  Archival (but possibly not easily printable)
Melinex 516 is [available from Talas at US$290 for a 2-mil (51μm) 60"
× 250' roll][6], which is 116m² or 1862 A4-page equivalents, or
US$0.16 per A4 page — comparable to the acetate.  Mylar’s refractive
index is about 1.65.

[3]: http://cool.conservation-us.org/byorg/abbey/an/an13/an13-5/an13-507.html
[4]: http://www.theswamp.org/index.php?topic=27878.0
[5]: http://www.amazon.com/Inkjet-Erasable-Mylar-Film-carton/dp/B008YWKUX8/ref=sr_1_2?ie=UTF8&qid=1400708761&sr=8-2&keywords=inkjet+mylar
[6]: http://apps.webcreate.com/ecom/catalog/product_specific.cfm?ClientID=15&ProductID=17967
[7]: http://www.thegrumble.com/archive/index.php/t-23425.html

What to store: Rosetta Project, OED, Wikipedia Vital Articles
-------------------------------------------------------------

The Rosetta Disk is currently slated to hold 13 000 pages of language
documentation, according to the project's home page at the moment, out
of the 100 000 they have gathered.  These 13 000 pages could be
encoded on about two to six A4-sized transparency films.  On 2-mil
film, this would occupy about 3–9 milliliters.

The whole 100 000 page collection [is available for download from the
Internet Archive][8].  This would be eight times as large: 25 to 75
milliliters, 16 to 50 sheets.

[8]: https://archive.org/details/rosettaproject

The first edition of the Oxford English Dictionary is slightly larger;
the English Wikipedia’s selection of 1000 “Vital Articles” is similar
in size.

