It was 2015-10-13.  Holy shit, I had future shock.  I’d just bought a
hardcover comic book (A4 size, full color, sewn in signatures) of
Rubius.  The Youtuber.  At a newspaper stand.

Who is Rubius?  He had 14 million subscribers on YouTube; now,
2017-01-10, he has 22.6 million. Has there ever been a public access
cable show with 22 million fans?  Mostly they’re gaming videos.  He
describes it as follows: “My channel of Gayplays of Minecr... Wait.
No. My channel is of Gayplays in general, but I never play anything
predefined.  Some days you’ll find horror games, others fun games,
others indie games, etc., but I don’t only upload Gayplays!”

I have no idea what “gayplays” are.

I’d heard of Rubius previously because when he had come to Argentina
the year before, 2014, there was a problem when his fans showed up at
the airport.

Paul Visscher estimated that he easily makes 7 or 8 figures per year
with his six million views per video.

I’m just surprised to live in a world where a gamer uploading videos
to YouTube is merchandising his brand via comic book spinoffs.

I looked into the economics of the comic book slightly.  I bought the
book for US$9.50.  The printing is done, not somewhere in Asia, but by
Cartoon S.A. in Salta, Argentina.  The Argentine copy I have says it’s
the second edition (which I think means “printing”), printed in 30,000
copies.  The artist is María Dolores Aldea, aka [Lolita Aldea][2].
She posted [the first 10 pages in PDF on her web site][0], from which
we can see that the Spain version of the book is printed by [Unigraf
SL][1], a Spanish company, in Catalonia, on the Mediterranean coast of
Spain, near Valencia.  They also print invitation cards and
personalized paper napkins.

[0]: http://static0.planetadelibros.com/libros_contenido_extra/31/30547_1_PRIMERASPAGINAS_Virtual_Hero.pdf
[1]: http://www.imprentasonline.org/unigraf-sl-onda/
[2]: http://www.lolitaaldea.com/

Cartoon S.A. is a little harder to figure out, but it looks like they
mostly do graphic design and printing for brochures and stuff like
that.

It seems like the “publisher”, as distinct from the two and presumably
more printing companies, is [the “children and young adult” imprint of
Grupo Planeta][3].  It doesn’t seem to be a vanity press like, say,
Blurb or Lulu.  It was founded 70 years ago.

[3]: http://www.planetadelibros.com/editorial-editorial-planeta-8.html

So, I’m thinking that Editorial Planeta (“Planet Publisher”) probably
bought personality rights from Rubius and are paying royalties to him
and the cartoonist.  Most of their kids’ books seem to be cartoon
books where they licensed the characters from someone else: Maya the
Bee (although the original book is out of copyright, the book looks
like a spinoff from the TV series), Violetta, Pixar’s Planes.
Apparently this is their second Rubius book; the first one was “[The
Troll Book][4]”.

[4]: http://www.planetadelibros.com/el-libro-troll-libro-119178.html

The thing that surprised me was not so much that there is a guy who is
well-known among Spanish-speaking video game fans — his videos are in
Spanish — but rather that he was *so* well-known that random newspaper
stands on the street were selling comic-book spinoffs from his YouTube
channel.  This was future-shockish to me.  Again.  Like in 1994 when
suddenly the number of internet books in bookstores went from like 3
to like 300 in the course of a few months, or 1996 or 1997 when
suddenly advertising had URLs in it.  It’s kind of mindblowing to me
that a gaming channel on YouTube is now a licensable brand on the same
level as Disney shows and Pixar movies.  And this was apparently their
[“most commented” book in the “young adult” category][5], although the
Violetta and Maya and Planes books are in a different category;
[*Violetta. En mi mundo*][6] is one example.

[5]: http://www.planetadelibros.com/index.php?tipo=tematicas&nombre=juvenil&tem=00027&filtrado=si
[6]: http://www.planetadelibros.com/violetta-en-mi-mundo-libro-92241.html

It’s also interesting that this 70-year-old press is outsourcing the
actual printing of these books to random graphic design storefronts in
different countries.
