Sandwich theory is the theory of sandwich structures, which are a kind
of anisotropic composite material consisting of two stiff “facesheets”
bonded to a lightweight “core”, like a two-dimensional version of a
one-dimensional I-beam; corrugated cardboard and drywall are the most
common examples.  I started reading about this because of an interest
in cardboard furniture (see file `cardboard-furniture`) and recycled
materials.

The basic theory
----------------

### Basic strength-of-materials background ###

When built with materials that aren’t full of cracks, structures
stressed in tension are generally quite strong, and in a way that
barely varies with size.  Piano wire (aka music wire — a kind of steel
used mostly for springs nowadays) has a yield stress of about 2.5 GPa,
so a platform that can support my 110 kg can be supported by 0.43 mm²
of piano wire, a wire 0.75 mm thick.  I’d have to sit down on it very
slowly to not break the wire on impact, and if you just connect the
wire directly to the platform, it will be kind of tippy; but hanging
by three or four such wires would be safe:

        ||     ||
       w||     ||w
       i|| me  ||i
       r||  o  ||r
       e|| /|\ ||e
       s|| / \ ||s
        ---------
        platform

Moreover, this holds whether the wires are connected to the ceiling
2.6 meters above my floor or to the top of a 100-meter-tall building
I’m swinging at the base of.  100 meters of four 0.43 mm² piano wires
would only weigh 1.4 kg, which is not a significant addition to my
weight; you have to get into kilometers of height before the weight of
the wire is a significant fraction of what it can support.

There’s a compressive strength that works the same way; if I put a
10-cm-diameter disk of cardboard under a wooden board and start piling
weight onto the board, there’s a certain amount of weight above which
the cardboard will get crushed; let’s say 300 kg, which is in the
ballpark but not a measured figure.  If you use several different
disks of the same cardboard, they’ll all crush at about the same
weight, and moreover that weight doesn’t change even if you stack two
or three or ten of the disks up; the same 300 kg will suffice to crush
the stack of ten disks as to crush a single disk.  If you use a bigger
disk, the weight needed to crush it will go up proportionally.

         weight
           ##
          ####
         ######  
    ----------------- wood
      =============
      ============= disks
    ----------------------- floor

But if you use smaller and smaller disks (and proportionally smaller
weights, including the wood), or taller and taller stacks, something
weird happens.  Well, not weird if you have any experience with
material objects, but different.  Once the stack gets taller than a
certain limit — say, around ten times its width, for
cardboard — taller and taller stacks can support less and less weight.
So I can stand on one 10-cm cardboard disk, and I can stand on a stack
of ten of them, and I can probably stand on the column of 650 of them
that it would take to reach 2.6 meters, but I definitely cannot stand
on a column of 100 meters of them.  In fact, I probably can’t even
build one.  Adding more cardboard to the stack in this way *reduces*
its compressive strength rather than leaving it unchanged.

I’m not talking about the top of the stack falling over sideways,
which also gets harder to avoid when the stack is taller; the
phenomenon I’m talking about happens even if you go into an elevator
shaft and rest an elevator-shaft-sized wooden platform on top of the
stack of disks.  I’m talking about *buckling* (*pandeo* in Spanish),
where the *middle* of the stack bends outwards in some random
direction and it stops being a linear stack.  Buckling is governed not
by the compressive strength of the column but by the *rigidity* of the
column.

Euler worked out the basic math for this.  For compressive forces
below Euler’s critical value, any small bend in the column, for
example due to sound waves, gets straightened back out by the column’s
elasticity.  But once the column is bearing a load over Euler’s
critical limit, such a small bend will get amplified by the
compressive stress more and more.  [Euler’s critical load] is
π²*EI*/(*KL*)², where *E* is the modulus of elasticity of the beam,
*I* is the least [planar area moment of inertia] of the column’s cross
section (πr⁴/2 for a solid circle), *L* is the length of the column,
and K (the “column effective length factor”) varies between ½ and 2;
it’s ½ in this case because the cardboard disks resting flat on the
ground and the elevator-shaft platform are not free to rotate.

[Euler’s critical load]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Buckling
[planar area moment of inertia]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_second_moments_of_inertia

Sadly I don’t have the faintest idea what the Young’s modulus of
corrugated cardboard in lateral compression is, but the things to
notice about this expression are:

1. It’s inverse-quadratic in *L*, so a column ten times as long can
   bear only one-hundredth the weight without buckling.
2. It’s directly proportional to the modulus of elasticity, so a beam
   that’s made from a material that’s one-third as stiff can only bear
   one-third the weight without buckling.
3. It doesn’t involve the *strength* of the cardboard *at all*; it
   only depends on its *stiffness*.
4. Compressive and tensile strengths are proportional to the
   cross-sectional area, but Euler’s critical buckling load is
   proportional to the area moment of inertia, *not* the
   cross-sectional area.

Point #1 here means that, normally, large structures fail because of
buckling before than they fail because of tensile or compressive
failure, unless they’re made of materials that are full of cracks.
This means that if you can improve buckling behavior somehow, you can
dramatically extend the size of structures you can construct.

These last three points are crucial to sandwich theory!  By stiffening
columns with high-stiffness facesheets, and increasing the moment of
inertia by moving those facesheets further apart by inflating the core
(even at the cost of some strength), we can make [sandwich-structured
composites] that resist buckling enormously more effectively than
their component materials.

[sandwich-structured composites]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sandwich_structured_composite

> There’s also flexural stress.  Sometimes large structures fail
because of flexural failure — trees dropping branches or blowing over
in a storm are examples.  Moreover, flexural stress shares with
buckling the property that you really need a great deal more material
to resist the load than you would expect — a steel beam that can
support my weight in flexion is generally going to need a great deal
more than 0.43 mm² of cross section.  I am going to mostly ignore
flexural stress, except as it contributes to buckling, because ⓐ the
same [sandwich-panel] construction that helps with buckling also helps
with flexural stress, and ⓑ flexural loads for a given beam
construction only fall inverse-proportional to the characteristic
dimension of the structure, while buckling loads are
inverse-proportional to its square, so for large enough structures
buckling still dominates.

[sandwich-panel]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sandwich_panel

#### Cracks ####

The cheapest building materials — earth, brick, other fired-clay
ceramics, concrete, mortar, glass, plaster of Paris, and often even
stone — are all full of cracks.  As long as they’re in compression,
this doesn’t matter, but once they’re in tension, the cracks form
stress risers that weaken them enormously.  This makes it difficult
and dangerous to build large structures from them unless they’re
heavily reinforced with materials with good tensile strength.  Adobe
is made from earth reinforced with straw, plaster of Paris is commonly
reinforced with horsehair, and concrete is commonly reinforced with
steel rebar.  Even so, larger buildings are invariably steel-framed
rather than relying on the tensile strength of even reinforced
masonry.

### Basic sandwich-theory background ###

The moment of inertia around the x-axis, *Iₓ*, is ∫∫*y*²*d*x*d*y*
where the area integrated over is that of the cross-section.  For
panels, that’s the only one we care about, because the panel is much
wider than it is thick, so if we take our x-axis parallel to its
surface, the y-axis moment of inertia is orders of magnitude too big
to worry about.

This says that if we have some cross-sectional area of material, we
can increase its moment of inertia proportionally, to an arbitrarily
high level, by moving it further from the x-axis:

    small moment  large moment
                    *****

      *****
    --*****--     --*****--
      *****

                    *****

The trouble with this is that once we insert empty spaces in the
middle, it stops being a solid object.  We need to put enough stuff in
the middle to keep the parts moving together; the stuff in the middle
is pretty much only stressed in *shear*.  Also, when the column is
flexing, the facesheet on the inside of the bend is in compression
merely from the flexing, and that compression can cause *it* to
buckle.

If we only have one material to work with, we can improve the
situation by moving almost all the material as far as possible from
the x-axis in both directions, leaving the rest of the material as
fine “webs” in between to resist the shear, and we have an I-beam, or
rectangular tubing, or a channel, or a sort of sandwich panel:

      *****     *****     *****     ***********************
        *       *   *     *         *   *   *   *   *   *  
        *       *   *     *         *   *   *   *   *   *  
    ----*---- --*---*-- --*------ --*---*---*---*---*---*--
        *       *   *     *         *   *   *   *   *   *  
        *       *   *     *         *   *   *   *   *   *  
      *****     *****     *****     ***********************

(This kind of sandwich panel, a single plastic with square channels
running through it, is in common use for translucent roofing for bus
stops around here; it’s called “twinwall plastic” when made from
polycarbonate, and similar sandwich panels made from other plastics
are called “corrugated plastic”, “corriboard”, or “coroplast”.)

More generally, you can use a different kind of material in the
middle, maybe one with not much strength of any kind, just enough to
resist the shear stress.  Incidentally, that shear stress is *also*
inversely proportional to the distance between the facesheets, so if
your panel is thick, you can get by with a very wimpy core material.
You do still need enough tensile and compressive strength provided by
the cross-sectional area of the facesheets and the core to withstand
the tensile and compressive stresses on the panel from its edges, but
in a large structure, that is a much easier problem than preventing
buckling.

XXX understand the theory

An underappreciated aspect of sandwich panels is that they are not
only stronger (in flexure and buckling) but also softer than the same
materials would be if solid.  This can increase their impact strength.

### Common current sandwich-panel examples ###

Single-wall corrugated cardboard, as I said, is the most common kind
of sandwich panel in daily life.  It has a smooth “linerboard” paper
on the “outside”, according to [Angela Ben-Eliezer], a corrugated
paper layer of “flutes”, and a second linerboard paper on the “inside”
which is not smooth, all glued together, typically with sodium
silicate.  The linerboard layers play the role of facesheets, while
the flutes play the role of the core — a highly anisotropic core, in
this case.

[Angela Ben-Eliezer]: https://youtu.be/o9fSsewMLo

The inner fluted layer is mostly air — typical corrugated cardboard is
made from paper of about 90–130 g/m², which makes it about 150 μm
thick, but has a 4-mm-thick fluted layer, so the fluted layer is about
96% air and 4% paper, and the cardboard as a whole is about 88% air
and 12% paper.  In fact, only part of the flutes — about half — is in
the fluted layer itself.  The other half is glued flat to one or the
other linerboard, making it part of the facesheet.

Double-wall and triple-wall corrugated cardboard is a less common
material, used for higher-strength applications.  Triple-wall
cardboard has three layers of flutes and four layers of linerboard,
and the interesting thing here is that the inner layer of flutes is
typically substantially thicker than the outer layers.  That is, it’s
a sandwich panel whose facesheets are themselves sandwich
panels!  It’s a recursive sandwich!

Drywall is a sandwich of gypsum (plaster of Paris) between two sheets
of paper.  Unlike the other examples, this isn’t to help it bear
buckling loads; it’s to give it tensile strength (and thus flexural
strength) so you can carry it around and drive screws through it,
instead of shattering the way plaster on lath would do if you treated
it that way.

Corrugated sheet steel is similar to corrugated cardboard, but just
the flutes, without the linerboard; it’s just a wavy sheet of steel.
This is not the most efficient use of material, since the “core”
consists of roughly as much steel as the “facesheets”, but it’s very
cheap to make.

Foamcore is a sandwich made of two sheets of paper with styrofoam in
between, commonly used for architectural models and picture framing.

The Hexayurt is made from sandwich panels sold in the US and some
other countries for house insulation; these are foamed
polyisocyanurate with aluminum-flashing facesheets.  Similar
lightweight rigid sandwich panels made of various materials are common
insulating materials; when the facesheets are some kind of structural
board material like OSB or drywall, it’s called a “structural
insulated panel”.

### Current more exotic examples ###

Fiberglass fabric glued onto the surface of styrofoam is a common
material for small airplanes, especially model airplanes.

RV enthusiasts have taken to fabricating furniture by cutting
styrofoam to shape, fitting them together, and coating the surface
with some kind of stiffener, such as fiberglass window screening
material stuck to the foam with latex paint.

I’m seeing sandwich panels on some of the bus lines here in Buenos
Aires; they seem to have polyethylene cores and melamine facesheets.

Cement board has been a common building material for decades; it’s a
sandwich with a cellulose-reinforced portland cement core and
glass-fiber mesh facesheets.  It’s kind of like drywall, but a lot
stiffer; it’s useful as an underlayment to keep tile floors laid over
wood from breaking when the wood flexes.

Common FDM 3-D printing slicers will, by default, fill the interior of
the model (whatever its shape) with a honeycomb, thus making it a sort
of three-dimensional quasi-sandwich-panel.  This is mostly to cut down
printing time, but it also helps to compensate for PLA’s abysmal
impact strength.

In aerospace, sandwiches with sheet-metal facesheets and metal
honeycomb cores are common.

The Grenfell Tower fire in 2017, which killed 72 people, about a
quarter of those present, was caused in large part by the use of
Arconic Reynobond PE sandwich panels, with aluminum facesheets around
a polyethylene core (not, I think, foam), which were covering an
150-mm-thick layer of polyisocyanurate foam under a ventilation space.

Candidates for upcycling garbage into sandwich panels
-----------------------------------------------------

Styrofoam and cardboard are the two most obvious candidate materials,
but many others are possible.  boPET, as in discarded chip bags and
one of the layers in TetraPak drink boxes, is fairly stiff.

microcellular polyethylene