People on the orange website were talking about some article about
conference-room air making people stupid because it’s full of CO₂,
sometimes several thousand ppm, while the outside air is only 400 ppm.
Other high-CO₂ environments discussed included full facial motorcycle
helmets at a stop light or after a crash, bedrooms at night, and so
on.

It turns out that a breathing mask to eliminate carbon dioxide from
input air is eminently feasible at a technical level, requiring only a
few dozen grams of lithium carbonate or soda lime per day.

(This is related to file `house-scrubber` and file `air-filter`.)

Whitewash and aloe
------------------

One of the major reasons I’m growing aloe vera plants is to eventually
be able to remedy this situation in my own house by using crassulacean
acid metabolism, and in the 19th century, according to _The Book of
Useful Knowledge_, one reason for painting buildings with whitewash
was that it purified the air (p. 249):

> DISINFECTANTS.  Agents which destroy miasmata. … Quicklime rapidly
> absorbs carbonic acid [CO₂], sulphureted hydrogen [H₂S], and several
> other noxious gases, and is therefore commonly used as a wash for
> the walls of buildings.

But of course it isn’t practical to go around whitewashing every new
conference room you want to attend a meeting in, although submarines
do something similar by hanging up curtains containing lithium
hydroxide.

Filter masks
------------

Could a person sufficiently unconcerned about social acceptance work
around this with a mask containing some carbon dioxide sorbent, like a
rebreather, but for input air?  Or would the reaction take place too
slowly, or saturate the CO₂ sorbent too fast?  You’d want to arrange
the mask to only filter the inhaled air, not the exhaled air, perhaps
using one-way valves like those used in snorkeling and scuba diving to
bypass the sorbent for exhalation.  A different possibility is to use
nasal tubes to infuse filtered air continuously into the nasal cavity.

### Candidate sorbents ###

Spacecraft and rebreathers, like submarine emergency scrubber curtains, also
typically use lithium hydroxide, but “soda lime” (75% slaked lime,
Ca(OH)₂, with a catalyst mix of 20% water, 3% NaOH, 1% KOH) is a
common alternative used in environments where weight is less critical,
like anesthesia.

Wikipedia’s [lithium hydroxide] article helpfully explains:

> one gram of anhydrous lithium hydroxide can remove 450 cm³ of carbon
> dioxide gas.

[lithium hydroxide]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lithium_hydroxide

The reaction consumes 2LiOH + CO₂, while the corresponding slaked lime
reaction consumes Ca(OH)₂ + CO₂, since calcium has two valence
electrons to sacrifice to the hydroxyl gods.  2LiOH weighs 47.9
daltons, while [Ca(OH)₂ weighs 74.093 daltons][calcium hydroxide], so
although soda lime might be a little heavier, the difference is not as
great as you would expect from just thinking about the relative atomic
numbers of lithium and calcium.  There’s a corresponding difference in
density so that the number of hydroxyls per unit volume is almost the
same for both compounds.

[calcium hydroxide]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Calcium_hydroxide

### Sorbent volumes per day ###

So one gram of lithium hydroxide, or a gram and a half of calcium
hydroxide, gives us 450 cm³ of CO₂ absorption; but how many cm³ do we
need to absorb to get through the day?

Typical human breath [tidal volume] is 500 mℓ.  Of that, normally
400 ppm is CO₂ on the way in, but perhaps more like 2000 ppm in bad
circumstances, which works out to 1 mℓ of CO₂ per breath.  So 450 cm³
is 450 breaths, or maybe five times that if the levels of CO₂ are low
enough that you should just shut the mask off anyway.  Typical adult
[respiratory rate] is 10–20 breaths per minute, so 450 breaths is
22½–45 minutes.  A whole 24-hour day, then, would be 32–64 grams of
lithium carbonate.

[tidal volume]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tidal_volume
[respiratory rate]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Respiratory_rate

### Sorbent exchange surface area needed ###

Normal rebreathers, like those used for anesthesia and closed-circuit
scuba diving, need to absorb something like 4% CO₂ from the
exhalation — 40000 ppm!  Moreover, they need to absorb nearly all of
the CO₂ (>95%), while in this case it would probably be adequate to
absorb half of it.  So sorbent used here could probably have about
100× smaller surface area to take up CO₂ from the gas.
