Robust hashsplitting with sliding Range Minimum Query
=====================================================

Hashsplitting is a process used by bup, `gzip --rsyncable`, and fuzzy
hashing used for spam and malware detection.  Current hashsplitting
systems are vulnerable to malicious input and are also needlessly
inefficient.  By using the linear-time sliding range-minimum-query
algorithm, we can improve its efficiency measurably and its robustness
against malicious input dramatically.

Background
----------

Bup and `gzip --rsyncable` and forensic “[fuzzy hashing][2]” all use a
sliding-checksum algorithm to split their input data into chunks at
irregular intervals, determined by the bytes in the neighborhood, in
such a way that the chunk boundaries will move with insertions and
deletions into the text.  Bup calls this process “hashsplitting.”
This generates, effectively, a pseudorandom number at each byte offset
depending on the previous bytes, and tests it against a customizable
threshold, or even set of thresholds, in order to figure out where to
divide into chunks.

### Naïve hashsplit chunk size has a geometric distribution. ###

Since chunk ending is a memoryless (Bernoulli) process, the
distribution of chunk sizes (the “waiting times”) follows a geometric
distribution, the discrete analogue of the exponential distribution.

The geometric distribution has a very large standard deviation (in the
limit, equal to its mean) because occasionally values much larger than
the mean will result.  For example, here are some interval sizes from
a Bernoulli process with parameter .001 [0]:

    array([2216,  130,  138,  125,  659,  861, 1708,  421, 1794, 1416,  810,
            982,  118,  237, 1755,  383,  841,  632,  200,   85, 1062, 1241,
           1804,  591,  916,  600, 1167,  630,  480,    9,  713, 2656,    2,
            883,  459,   71, 2753,  599,  389, 2187,  593,  442,  348,  764,
           3094, 1371,  481, 2667,  194, 1093,  183,  671,  872,  874,  311,
            345, 1958,  219,   81,  593,  365,  988,  349,  673,  909, 2013,
            267,  387,  503,  146,  339, 4818,  200, 1393, 1556, 1640, 1257,
            816, 1618, 1630, 4719,  699,  693, 2515,  161,  505,  782,  922,
             23,  226,  489, 1757,  933, 1966,  698, 2500,  837,  352, 1508,
            339])

XXX can I maybe measure the chunk sizes from bup?

The mean waiting time of this process is 1000 (and the mean of these
variates is 964 and their standard deviation 898) but more than a
third of them are less than half the mean, and one of them is almost
three times that.  Two of them are more than four times the mean,
which is slightly more than typical.

### Geometric chunk size distribution is inefficient. ###

As noted in the [design of bup][1], for many of the applications of
hashsplitting, although some variability is demanded by the
application, this large degree of variability is undesirable.

For example, if the above numbers came from using a sliding-checksum
algorithm to divide a slightly modified 96-kilobyte file into
roughly-1000-byte chunks and calculate a hash of each, so that we
could transmit or store only the newly changed chunks, the changes
will be disproportionately concentrated in the larger chunks, which in
turn are disproportionately expensive to transmit or store; the 9-byte
chunk and the 2-byte chunk are very unlikely to have been the ones
that changed!  So the cost of a chunk is proportional to the *square*
of the chunk size, which, after all, is why we’re splitting the input
into chunks in the first place.  In this case, the extra cost is some
32%.

### Current hashsplitting performance is vulnerable to malicious data. ###

The situation gets worse if the data being handled is actively
adversarial.  Sliding-checksum algorithms tend to be linear functions
of the last N bytes, in order to make them efficient to compute.  This
means that a data-generating adversary who knows the particular
sliding checksum in use can generate data which will either never
generate a cut, producing arbitrarily large blocks, or generate a cut
very frequently — every four bytes for an Adler-32 (as used by `gzip
--rsyncable`), CRC32, or simple 32-bit checksum, for example.  Under
some circumstances, this “pathological” data could cause serious
problems in a program attempting to apply them.  Even if the sliding
checksum were impractical to calculate preimages for, an attacker
could still repeat a "separator" sequence of the size of the checksum’s
window (64 bytes in Bup) that induces a split.

It would be useful to have a pseudorandom algorithm that still
triggered at the same places after faraway insertions or deletions,
but whose waiting times didn’t suffer from this large variability and
vulnerability to adversarial input.

Sliding range minimum query
---------------------------

Range minimum query, or RMQ, is a well-studied algorithmic problem:
given some finite sequence H — say, a sequence of hash
values — efficiently find the index of a minimum value `H[k]` in some
range [i, j), that is, find a `k` such that

    i <= k < j ∧ ∀n ∈ ℤ: i <= n < j → H[n] >= H[k]

(Of course this works just as well for maxima.)

There are a bunch of data structures for this.  You can precompute a
table of the results in O(N²) space and time and answer arbitrary
queries in constant time, or a "segment tree" of the results in O(N)
space and time and answer arbitrary queries in O(log N) time, along
with other possibilities.

However, one particular special case is the *sliding* RMQ problem,
where the window size `j - i` is a constant; this can be computed for
all possible values, with [the following simple linear-time
algorithm][3]:

    size = j - i
    d = make_deque(max_size = size)
    k = 0
    for item in H:
        while d.nonempty() and H[d.rightmost()] > item:
            d.remove_rightmost()

        d.add_on_right(k)
        if d.leftmost() <= k - size:
            d.remove_leftmost()

        yield d.leftmost()
        k += 1
        
Hashsplitting with sliding range minimum query
----------------------------------------------

If you run the sliding RMQ algorithm over a sequence of hash values
generated from the text, as long as the values are unique within the
window, it is guaranteed to generate at least one split per window
size.  OH FUCK IT CAN GENERATE ONE SPLIT EVERY BYTE.  Is that fixable?

Probably the thing to do is to take, say, every 8KiB window starting
from the start of the file, and split at the location of the minimal
hash within that window.  But that requires no algorithmic cleverness
whatsoever.

[0] Python code for calculating waiting times of a Bernoulli process:

    def bernoulli_process(p):
        while True:
            yield random.random() > p

    def intervals(process):
        i = 0
           for item in process:
               i += 1
               if item:
                   yield i
                   i = 0

    x = numpy.array(list(itertools.islice(intervals(bernoulli_process(.999)),
        100)))

[1]: https://github.com/bup/bup/blob/master/DESIGN "The Crazy Hacker's Crazy Guide to Bup Craziness, by Avery Pennarun"

[2]: http://ssdeep.sourceforge.net/ "Fuzzy Hashing and ssdeep, a program for computing context triggered piecewise hashes (CTPH), by Jesse Kornblum"

[3]: http://wcipeg.com/wiki/Sliding_range_minimum_query