> [Gussow's] most oft-quoted statistic is that shipping a strawberry
> from California to New York requires 435 calories of fossil fuel but
> provides the eater with only 5 calories of nutrition.

Some Rambling Figures
---------------------

Well, we towed our 5000lb Vanagon across the country (with a rather
larger truck than we needed) at about 10 miles per gallon.  A gallon
of diesel is about 130MJ, or 13MJ per Vanagon-mile, or 2.6kJ per
pound-mile, or 5.7 J per gram-mile.

Diesel's energy density:
<http://hypertextbook.com/facts/2006/TatyanaNektalova.shtml>

Google Maps says it's 2906 miles to drive from San Francisco to New
York City, which would be 17 kJ per gram.  Suppose the strawberry is
20 grams.  That's 330 kJ.  A kilocalorie, or food calorie, is 4.2kJ,
so that's 79 calories.

However, commercial trucking is considerably more efficient.
Interstate highways are built to support vehicles of up to 80 000
lbs. gross vehicular weight (40 tons), although much of Europe seems
to allow up to 60 tons.  <http://www.oilcrisis.com/transport/> claims
that 18-wheelers get "120 to 200 gross ton miles per gallon", while
trains get 750.  <http://www.answerbag.com/q_view/138616> claims "8mpg
when I'm on time; 4mpg when I'm behind schedule," and "4.5 to 7.5
mpg."  4mpg at 40 tons would be 160 gross ton miles per gallon.

But not all of that 40 tons is strawberries; some of it is the tractor
and the trailer.  [One random web
page](http://www.groupsrv.com/science/about358761.html) suggests 35000
lbs. for the tare weight.  So your 4mpg is hauling 45000 lbs. of
stuff, so that's 180 000 pound-miles per gallon, or about 720J per
pound-mile, or 1.6J per gram-mile, or 4.6kJ per gram.  Or 92kJ per
strawberry, which is 21 calories.

Conclusion #1
-------------

Which is one twentieth of Gussow's figure: 21 calories to drive the
strawberry across the country, not 435 calories.  Maybe there are
other energy costs but I don't see how they could add up to 20 times
the energy cost of actually moving the truck.

More Rambling Figures
---------------------

But the train is 4.7 times more efficient (per gross ton mile) and
perhaps has a higher fraction of its weight devoted to cargo rather
than chassis.  If the fraction were the same, a train would bring the
figure down to 4.7 calories per strawberry.

[Time Magazine's local eating on campus article
sidebar](http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,1126709,00.html?iid=sphere-inline-sidebar
Margot Roosevelt, 2005-11-07) says that the average distance is only
half that: 1500 miles.

Other Variations
----------------

Now, suppose that our calorie per gram of California-to-New-York
transport cost is getting spent on transporting rice (5 calories per
gram) or vegetable oil (9 calories per gram) instead of strawberries
(hypothetically, less than a calorie per gram).  Suddenly it looks
pretty affordable, energy-wise, to truck those foods all the way
across the US if they taste a little better or are a little cheaper.

Boat freight, I think, is even cheaper.  Considerably cheaper.  Air
freight costs more.

What if gas prices go up?  Well, if they go up enough, we'll start
using rice and corn to power the trucks.  But more importantly,
they're already only 10% of the cost of the vegetable oil if you truck
it from a crushing plant in San Francisco to a restaurant in New York.

Stuff to Check
--------------

What's the tare weight of an 18-wheeler?  What fraction of a train is
tare weight?

