Typical term-rewriting patterns are of the form

    x(?y, z) -> foo(?y, ?y)

where the “?” identifies the `y` as a variable (or, we might say, a
metavariable).  This poses a certain amount of difficulty for
metacircularity, such as a program to determine whether a set of
rewrite rules is confluent (normalizing); you might want to look for
the literal pattern `?y` or especially `??y` for any `?y` in some
rewrite rule you are trying to manipulate.

Prolog, where all this originally came from, is even trickier along
this axis, since it spells `foo` and `?foo` as `foo` and `Foo`,
respectively.

One possible solution to this problem is to declare the metavariables
out-of-line:

    (rewrite (y) (x y z) (foo y y))

or

    metavariable y;
    x(y, z) -> foo(y, y)

-----

Another aspect of term-rewriting languages is that they don’t
accommodate extensible data structures very easily.  Suppose you have
a bunch of rules of the following form:

    ?x + constant(0) -> ?x

Now, you decide that constants should additionally include the line
and column number where they were found, thus improving your debugging
information.  This forces you to modify the above rule as follows:

    ?x + constant(0, ?_) -> ?x

And you must do the same thing for all similar rules.

Suppose instead that the nodes of your graph instead have arbitrary
sets of named properties, perhaps namespaced to avoid unfortunate
property collisions, and with the proviso that extra properties not
mentioned never cause a match failure.  Then we can write the above
instead as follows:

    {addend1: ?x, addend2: {constant_value: 0}} -> ?x

This version will survive such an augmentation without modification.

-----

This is the same data model as Binate, and suggests that you should be
able to write such rewrite systems as Binate relations, making them
point-free (and solving the above problem of metacircularity in a
different way): the transitive closure of some rewrite relation,
perhaps.  That is, the above algebraic rewrite rule would be part of a
relation called something like `algebraically_simplifies_to`, so we
could ask whether

    (4 + 0) algebraically_simplifies_to 4.

or indeed what a given expression simplifies to.  The
`algebraically_simplifies_to` arc or arcs from that expression would
be in some sense on equal standing with the `addend1` node from it to
4.  We can take the transitive closure of that relation and subtract a
version of its own converse from it to exclude results that can be
algebraically simplified further.

I am not sure if this is in practice a feasible thing to do with
Binate, or what would be needed to make it feasible, or whether it
would be practical, but it is a very appealing simplification and
unification!

It also avoids the ugly ad-hoc extension to term-rewriting
pattern-matching in Leler’s Bertrand (p.53 of his book)
where `aNumber` matches any number, etc.

I think one big problem here is that in Binate, equality is (I think)
necessarily defined by identity rather than content: two point objects
with the same `x` and `y` properties are not equal, because one of
them might have some other property (such as `z`) which is not
supposed to affect the behavior of queries that don’t mention that
property.
