It is often noted that users continue to use inefficient ways of doing
things (for example, repeating cursor-key movements) even when better
ways are available (for example, mouse clicks or incremental search
(LEAP, as Raskin called it)).  A simple way to change users’ behavior
might be to add a certain amount of extra frustration to the
inefficient way of doing things.

For example, perhaps the first cursor-key movement takes 10ms, and
each successive one takes 20% longer, so the first few delays would be
[10, 12, 14, 17, 21, 25, 30, 36, 43, 52, 62, 74, 89, 107, 128, 154,
185, 222, 266, 319, 383, 460, 552, 662, 795, 954, 1145, 1374, 1648,
1978] milliseconds.  For moving three or four characters, the cursor
movement would be instant; even at 14 characters it would be barely
perceptible; at 19 it would start to feel slow; and by 28 it would be
really annoying.  Even without any further features, this would start
to be uncomfortable enough to encourage users to practice other
methods of movement, if they knew them.

This is just one example of a larger shift in user interface design
that I think is overdue.  The job of the user interface is not just to
provide access to functionality and reduce the user’s cognitive load;
it should also progressively enhance the user to higher and higher
levels of awesomeness by shaping their behavior.  It’s unavoidable
that the results produced by the user interacting with the UI will
shape the user’s behavior through classical and operant conditioning,
but so far user interface and user experience designers have not risen
to meet the responsibility that comes with that fact; if anything, the
result has been the opposite, where user experience designers at
companies like Zynga and Facebook work to shape users’ behavior to
click more ads and use their apps more.

A good user interface, like a game, is its own tutorial.
