Electrolytic anodizing, with a small movable electrode
======================================================

You can produce different brilliant colors on titanium, or on metal
coated with a titanium sputtered coating, by producing different
thicknesses of titanium dioxide surface layers.  Because titanium
dioxide has such a high refractive index — 2.5–2.6 — the reflection
from the top of the coating is much stronger than from other similar
metal oxide coatings, resulting in almost complete interference and
thus strongly saturated iridescent colors.

The conventional way of making such oxide layers on titanium is by
heating it in air, with the temperature of the surface largely
determining the thickness of the oxide, but this carries the drawback
that it can generally only produce very gradual variations of
thickness across a surface, because if there are large temperature
differences over small distances in the surface, they will quickly
disappear.  Perhaps with localized laser heating, this disadvantage
could be removed.

But I have another idea in mind.  Rather than heating the material to
promote diffusion of oxygen through the oxide layer, let’s anodize it.
This involves applying a positive voltage to the titanium in an
aqueous electrolyte, stealing electrons from the surface metal atoms
and giving them to water molecules, liberating oxygen from them to
combine with the metal.

Anodizing titanium to produce different colors is a known technique:
<https://thekidshouldseethis.com/post/anodizing-titanium-the-rainbow-metal>,
for example.

If this is done with a cathode very close to the surface of the anode,
it should produce a very localized coating; and applying varying
amounts of current to different spots on the anode should produce
different coating thicknesses, and thus different colors.

This should enable the production of brilliantly colored patterns on
titanium surfaces.  I don’t know if the full gamut of visible colors
can be thus produced by dithering light from nearby dots, but I
suspect so.