A typical representation of a binary tree in memory might be something
like this:

    typedef struct node { char *key; struct node *left, *right; } node;
    node qn = { "queer", NULL, NULL }
       , rn = { "rude", qn, NULL }
       , tn = { "the", NULL, NULL }
       , sn = { "sad", rn, tn }
    ;

This is, as it happens, a binary search tree: the key of a node is
always greater than any of the nodes in its left subtree and less than
any of the nodes in its right subtree.  In this case we’re using it to
store a set of words.

You could write separate functions to do things like efficiently look
up a word to see if it’s in the tree, print out all the words in the
tree, hash all the words in a lexical range of the tree into a hash
table.  Most of these functions, in C, will have this general form:

    void process_tree(node *n, context *ctx) {
        if (!n) return;
        results r = process_node(n->key, ctx);
        if (left_wanted(r)) process_tree(n->left, ctx);
        if (right_wanted(r)) process_tree(n->right, ctx);
    }

Different `process_tree` functions will have different `results`,
`process_node` `left_wanted`, and `right_wanted`, in some cases
trivial ones, but all of the functions I mentioned above can be
written in this way.

An obvious thing to do then is to factor out the common `process_tree`
logic into a function and pass in a `process_node` function to it with
a defined interface; for example:

    typedef struct { bool left, right; } wanted;
    typedef struct { wanted (*f)(const char *, void *); void *ctx; } visitor;
    void visit_tree(node *n, visitor v) {
        if (!n) return;
        wanted w = v.f(n->key, v.ctx);
        if (w.left) visit_tree(n->left, v);
        if (w.right) visit_tree(n->right, v);
    }

This definitely works, and it’s within a constant factor of optimal,
but it is maybe a little bit inefficient.  In particular, it spends a
lot of its time passing null pointers to itself, copying the two-word
visitor struct, and consulting booleans to figure out whether to
recurse on a null pointer.  Also, even though it will always visit the
parts of the tree that it visits in the same order, it requires that
order to be represented wastefully in memory with a bunch of pointers,
and then it recovers that order from those pointers.

So I was thinking about immediate-mode GUIs (“IMGUI”) and tree
traversal, and it occurred to me that there’s an interesting
alternative in many cases.

Here’s an alternative representation of the tree above that works with
the same `visitor` type:

    void sad_tree(visitor v) {
        wanted w = v.f("sad", v.ctx);
        if (w.left) {
            if (v.f("rude", v.ctx).left) v.f("queer", v.ctx);
        }
        if (w.right) v.f("the", v.ctx);
    }

In a sense, this is just a partially-evaluated version of `visit_tree`
for the above tree; it will perform the same sequence of calls to
`v.f` with the same arguments, given the same return values.  Since it
can do all of the preorder visitor traversals described above, it is
in some sense a fairly universal representation of the tree.

Probably you wouldn’t really want to write `sad_tree` by hand, at
least in this case.  But it might make sense to compile it from some
other representation, either with run-time code generation or from
some kind of source code.

It might actually be worthwhile to write it by hand in some cases,
because the visitor interface allows you to traverse kinds of trees
other than trees entirely materialized in memory ahead of time.