Most AVRs support “TWI”, their slightly bastardized version of Philips
I²C.  In theory, this should allow you to hook up any number of AVRs
(and maybe other devices) on a shared two-wire bus (SDA and SCL), or
up to 113 of them, anyway, and communicate at 400 kbps.  It even
supports address-recognition wakeup, even from deep sleep modes that
don’t run a clock to the TWI interface — it uses the bus clock itself
for wakeup!

In particular, the ATMega328P used in Arduinos supports it.

Actually, it turns out that only slave devices need addresses; because
masters can initiate both reads and writes, they do not need
addresses.  So you could connect an infinite number of masters to the
bus.  Fat lot of good that’ll do you, though, if they can’t talk to
each other!

What I was thinking with this is that if you want a bunch of GPIO
pins, more than the Arduino has, or want to control more power than
the Arduino can, it might make the most sense to add some more chips
on a TWI bus in order to add those GPIO pins.  This could potentially
also give you modularity — you can plug boards together with just four
wires, as long as you don’t have slave address conflicts, which will
probably happen around 10 devices without some mechanism to assign
addresses dynamically.

I don’t think the I²C bus deals with chips running at different
voltages.

Fatal problems with I²C
-----------------------

As I dig more into this, it seems increasingly impractical as a way of
building a modular system that is easy to extend, for the following
reasons:

- Address assignment: aside from the occasional awful IC with a [fixed
  I²C address][4] or only a few bits assignable, even randomly assigned
  addresses over the whole 7-bit space will give you collisions after
  11 devices, on average.  To avoid this, you have to intervene to
  assign addresses by hand, but even then, [Elliot Williams says][3]
  he’s never seen as many as 20 devices on an I²C bus.  Some kind of
  daisy-chaining arrangement like JTAG uses would be a lot better.
- Voltage incompatibility: I²C high is 0.7 Vcc or above, which means
  that the 3.3 V power rail isn’t high enough to be high on a 5V
  system.  There’s a [standard technique to work around this][5] with
  a discrete MOSFET per pin.
- Speed: 400kbps is pretty slow.  This results in part from the
  single-ended nature of the I²C bus.
- Fanout: the drive capability you need to make your I²C bus work
  depends on the speed you’re running it at and the total capacitance
  of the devices attached to it.  If you have too much capacitance
  attached for the drive current of a device, you can’t make it all
  the way down to 0.3 Vcc (its low level) in time.  5 mA should be
  fine for a couple of devices but maybe not 10 devices, depending in
  part on signal routing, and the standard specifies 400 pF as the
  maximum.  And you need stronger pullups if you have more devices,
  which of course requires still stronger pin drive.
- Bus hangs: [there’s a known bug in I²C][6] where resetting a master
  in the middle of a transfer can leave a slave hanging the bus
  indefinitely.  SMBus fixes this with timeouts.

[3]: https://hackaday.com/2016/07/19/what-could-go-wrong-i2c-edition/
[4]: https://learn.adafruit.com/i2c-addresses/the-list
[5]: https://cdn-shop.adafruit.com/datasheets/AN10441.pdf
[6]: http://processors.wiki.ti.com/index.php/I2C_Tips#External_Slave_Device_Hanging_the_Bus_by_Holding_SDA_Low

Addresses
---------

You would think that with 7-bit addresses, you would get 128 devices,
but the address 0000 000 and the 8 addresses 1111 xxx are reserved, so
you actually only get 119 devices.  And actually 0000 xxx are
reserved for other purposes, though Atmel doesn’t document this,
so you only get 113.  0000 000 is for broadcast.  The
bus arbitration algorithm provides strict priority among slave
addresses; the broadcast address is the highest-priority possible
address.

Bit rates
---------

An address packet is 9 bits long, and following an address packet, you
can transmit any number of 9-bit data packets, each bearing 8 bits of
data.  There are an additional two bit-times at the beginning to
indicate the START condition and two more at the end to indicate the
STOP condition. This ought to mean that you can transmit 20000
one-byte packets per second, or up to 44000 bytes per second in large
transmissions.

The AVR implementation supposedly supports clock stretching, and
indeed depends on it in order to give interrupt handlers time to
respond.

The bit rate is set by the TWBR register to (CPU clock frequency)/(16
+ 2 · TWBR · prescaler), which puts a maximum bit rate of 1/16 of the
clock speed.  For clock speeds over 6.4 MHz (including the maximum
internal RC oscillator speed of 8 MHz) this should not be a
consideration, but systems that use lower clock speeds to get better
power consumption might be limited.  (And apparently the CPU clock
needs to be at least 250 kHz for TWI to work at all).  In theory this
only affects communications that include the slow chip.

The possible prescaler values are 1, 4, 16, and 64.

Electrical limitations
----------------------

For reliable operation, the AVRs’ 20 mA drive needs to be able to
discharge all of the input capacitances on the bus at well over
400 kHz — say, in a microsecond.  Worse, the pullups need to be able
to charge them, and the drive needs to be able to fight the pullup.
This suggests that only a couple of thousands of pF of input
capacitance on the bus can be tolerated.

However, some other devices have smaller drive capabilities.

Chip support
------------

Bit-banging I²C or TWI seems very challenging, due to requirements of
bidirectional open-collector pins with slew rate limiting and spike
filtering.  It seems like something you could do with an external
chip, but that’s kinda what we’re trying to avoid here.

AVRs have interrupt support for TWI, but the interface involves one
interrupt per byte transferred, and occasionally more.  At 400 kbps
and an 8 MHz CPU clock, you have at least 180 cycles between
successful complete byte transfers.

The slave address register TWAR can be set to whatever address you
want.

The ATmega328P, like its smaller variants the ATmega48A, ATmega48PA,
ATmega88A, ATmega88PA, ATmega168A, ATmega168PA, and ATmega328,
supports a single TWI bus on pins 27 and 28, or balls 4B and 4A in its
UFBGA incarnation.  The ATmega48/88/48PB/88PB/168PB supports a single
TWI bus on pins 27 and 28.  The ATmega16U4 used on the Arduino for its
USB interface, and its larger version the ATmega32U4
(also the core of the Adafruit Feather), support a single
TWI bus on pins 18 and 19.  The ATmega8A supports a single TWI bus on
pins 27 and 28.  The ATtiny20 has a TWI bus for slave mode only on
pins 6 and 3 (out of 14), pins 12 and 15 of its 20-pin VQFN, balls 2B
and 2B of its UFBGA, or balls 3C and 5C of its 12-ball WLCSP.  The
ATtiny40 has a TWI bus for slave mode on pins 16 and 13 (out of 20),
or 11 and 14 in VQFN.

The ATmega328P comes in a 4 mm square VQFN and a 4 mm square, 0.6 mm
thick UFBGA, but no smaller packages.  This is smallish but even the
UFBGA is 8 times the size of the ATtiny20 12-ball WLCSP mentioned
above.

The obsolete ATtiny2313’s USI claims to support TWI, but without slew
rate limiting and spike filtering, and it sounds like you pretty much
have to implement the protocol in software.  It is not clear to me
that this will work, and definitely it is not interrupt-driven.

The ATtiny25/45/85 and ATtiny13/ATtiny13V do not support TWI, just
SPI.  (I think the 25/45/85 may have a 2313-like USI.)  The
ATTiny4/5/9/10 don’t support either TWI or SPI.

More detail on the ATtiny20
---------------------------

The ATtiny20, despite being slave-only, is especially appealing for
adding I/O lines to a distributed system linked by a TWI bus because
its WLCSP incarnation is 1.56 × 1.40 mm and 0.54 mm thick, and its
UFBGA (like the VQFN for the ATtiny40) is 3 mm square.  Even its TSSOP
and VQFN are only 5 mm square.

The ATtiny20 additionally supports 10-bit extended addresses and
address masking, although that isn’t useful without a similarly
capable master to communicate with.

This tiny size still has a substantial current drive capability,
though; at a drop of 0.8 volts, it can sink or source the usual 20 mA
per pin at 5 V or 10 mA at 3 V, except on its reset pin.  Running at
lower voltages lowers the possible current substantially.

Digi-Key sells ATtiny20s in most packages from 56¢ in quantity 1, but
the WLCSP costs 92¢.

Non-AVR chip support
--------------------

Many other things nominally support I²C, although apparently
compatibility problems are not unusual.  Many EEPROMs support
I²C — this is the main use of I²C actually — and
the popular Cypress CY7C68013A/CY7C68014A/CY7C68015A/CY7C68016A EZ-USB
FX2LP 8051 supports 100 or 400 kHz I²C, for example, but only as a
master; it can use this for booting from an EEPROM at startup.  The
popular ultra-low-power TI MSP430G2x53/MSP430G2x13 microcontroller
supports I²C; not sure how much of the rest of their family does.

As an example of EEPROMs that support I²C, consider the AT24C32/64,
with 4096 and 8192 bytes, respectively, 5 mm × 4 mm in SOIC or 3 mm ×
4.5 mm in TSSOP.  These use 3 of their 8 pins to set the I²C address
of the EEPROM to 1010xxx (so you can gang up to 8 of them on a bus)
and support the 400 kHz rate at 5 V.  They support writes of up to 32
bytes at a time, or longer if what you want is a 32-byte ring buffer.

These EEPROMs have their own internal charge pump for erasing, so they
need only a single supply.  They can drive 5 mA and have 8 pF of input
impedance, which works out to 50 kΩ at 400 kHz, so in theory support
fanout of about 50.  This is much less than the total of 119 from the
address limits.

The other microcontrollers I’m most interested in are the STM32
family, the LPCxxxx family, and the ESP8266/ESP32 family, just because
they seem to be the most popular at the moment (other than PICs, which
I would prefer to avoid entirely).

The STM32F0 does support I²C, including 10-bit addresses
(and some even have two I²C interfaces), and
it’s even functional in “low-power stop modes”, which I guess means it
can turn the chip on.  I think it’s only 3.3 volts, though, which
seems like it could pose interoperability problems.  [The cheapest
STM32 at Digi-Key is the STM32F030F4P6][7], which goes for US$1.30,
down to 59¢ in quantity.  [The cheapest STM32 with CAN is the
STM32F042F4P6][8], which is US$2.18 down to US$1.07.

The LPC1769 naturally supports I²C, and actually supports more than
one bus per chip, I think.

The ESP32 supports I²C.

The TI DRV8830 is a 6.8V 1A H-bridge chip controlled over I²C.

Other peripherals?  ADCs probably don’t make sense (the AVRs have ADCs
built in, and higher-speed ADCs are too fast for the I²C bus; they
would need to just be high-precision, low-speed ADCs) but things like
LCDs, DACs, and high-power switches (“drivers”) might make sense.
Also radios, of course.  H-bridges or ESCs would be super nice.  RAMs
might be useful too, even if a bit slow.  How about other radios,
including LoRa and BLE?

The [ONSemi NCP5623][0] is a linear I²C RGB LED driver that can drive
three LEDs at up to 90mA on 2.7 to 5.5 V using current mirrors, but
with only 32 PWM levels.  I can’t figure out how its address is
determined or what its PWM frequency is.

The [ONSemi LV8498CT][1] is a voice-coil motor driver IC with I²C
control; it’s basically a current-mode 10-bit DAC running up to 150 mA
at 5 VDC.  Its slave address is 0110011, so you can only use one of
them on a bus.  I can’t figure out how fast or slow it is.

The [ONSemi LV5236V][2] is a 24-channel 5V I²C LED driver with 5-bit
PWM and/or up to 50–100mA per LED, or maybe 30 mA per LED controlled
by a DAC, I can’t tell.  It’s 5.6 mm × 15.45 mm.  It has five address
pins, so you can set its address to any 10xxxxx.  Digi-Key will charge
you US$3 for one, which works out to 12.5¢ per LED.

Maxim has an LM75 I²C temperature sensor with three address pins to
configure its address to any 1001xxx address.

[0]: https://www.onsemi.com/pub/Collateral/NCP5623-D.PDF
[1]: http://www.onsemi.com/pub/Collateral/ANDLV8498CT-D.PDF
[2]: http://www.onsemi.com/pub/Collateral/ENA1943-D.PDF
[7]: https://www.digikey.com/product-detail/en/stmicroelectronics/STM32F030F4P6/497-14044-5-ND/4357517
[8]: https://www.digikey.com/product-detail/en/stmicroelectronics/STM32F042F4P6/497-17343-ND/5268187

Alternatives to I²C
-------------------

### SMBus ###

SMBus is a slight tweak on I²C which adds a few requirements to
prevent hung or powered-off components from screwing up the bus, but
it doesn’t solve the fundamental problems.

### CAN ###

The CAN bus sort of seems to be designed as an answer to some of these
problems, but for some reason CAN bus drivers are expensive, and
anyway they don’t solve the problem of address assignment.

### JTAG ###

JTAG has the desirable attributes of being daisy-chained and thus
partly avoiding the problems of address assignment and fanout.  It
uses four or five wires, not counting power supplies: TCK, TMS, TDI,
TDO, and optionally TRST*; you chain TDO of one chip to the TDI of the
next, but you run TCK and TMS to all the chips, thus still potentially
having fanout limits.

TMS is “test mode select”, which clocks in a sequence of bits to drive
the JTAG controller state machine.  In particular, the sequence 11111
will always drive the state machine to its reset state, where it will
remain as long as it gets more 1 bits; from there, the introduction of
strategically placed zeroes into the TMS data stream can navigate it
to other states, five of which are stable on 0 (i.e. have 0-edges to
themselves).  TMS bits are clocked in on the rising edge of TCK, and
then the resulting states can cause TDI bits to be clocked into things
on the falling edge of TCK.

The reset via TMS is somewhat fault-tolerant in the sense that a
single spurious 0 is not sufficient to transition the state engine to
take any action; three more 1s in succession will successfully drive
the state machine back to the reset state.

At times, depending on the state of the JTAG state machine and the
“current instruction”, TDI is clocked directly to TDO, converting a
whole chip into just a single clock delay.  At other times, a shift
register is interposed between TDI and TDO, but which one depends on
both the JTAG state machine and the current instruction — it can be
the current-instruction register or a data register determined by the
current instruction.  Two of the aforementioned five stable states,
Shift-DR and Shift-IR, are the ones that interpose shift registers.

The instruction register is required to be at least 2 bits because
there are 4 required instructions: BYPASS (all 1s), EXTEST (once, all
0s, but then they decided that was a bad idea), PRELOAD, and SAMPLE,
which may be the same as PRELOAD.

The TDO line is supposed to be “set to its inactive drive state except
when the scanning of data is in progress”, which turns out to be when
the chip is in Shift-DR or Shift-IR state.  This allows you to share
TDI and TCK between chains and wire their TDO lines together, using a
separate TMS for each line to select which one will be active.

Two other optional states in the rather complicated (16 states!) state
machine permit either overwriting the shift register from data held
elsewhere (i.e. moving data from an internal register into the shift
chain) and overwriting data held elsewhere from the shift register.

Although the state machine is complicated, the standard actually
includes a circuit diagram showing that you can implement it with 32
NAND gates and 8 D flip-flops, under 200 transistors.

I like this idea of using a sequence of bits to maneuver a state
machine around, and I like the idea of bucket-brigading a bunch of
bits through a daisy chain, but I don’t like the fanout of TMS and
TCK, even though they’re always driven by the bus master, and so in
the worst case just need a couple of big Darlingtons.  I really like
the idea of altering the bucket-brigade topology at runtime by
bypassing some devices in order to prevent latency from the bucket
brigade.  I don’t particularly like the separation of TMS and TDI,
which seems unnecessary — JTAG ends up needing 6 wires if you include
power, while CAN and I²C make do with only 4.

### A hypothetical super-JTAG ###

What if you could redesign JTAG?

#### Bit-stuffing nonsense ####

To unify TMS and TDI, a very simple kind of bit-stuffing could use a
sequence of 5 1 bits as a magic resynchronization/reset sequence, and
when transferring data, send nybbles of 4 arbitrary bits preceded by a
non-optional 0, thus preventing the magic sequence from occurring
regardless of the data being transmitted, at only a 25% overhead.

Following the magic reset sequence, or indeed following a single 1
following a nybble of data, we could maybe have a variety of different
states.

To provide addressing of individual slave devices, one possibility is
to have a state that decrements a fixed-width little-endian hop-count
address field, for example of 8 bits; if the borrow is set at the end,
it means it rolled over from 0 to 0xFF, which means you’re the
intended destination!  This entitles you to overwrite whatever payload
data may follow, so that when it eventually gets shifted around to the
master again, it contains your reply.

If we want to get rid of the clock line too, we might want a different
kind of bit-stuffing that ensures frequent transitions.

#### A better, connection-oriented approach for unicast ####

Consider a simpler approach in which the bus master repeats these
three steps repeatedly: 1. establish a connection to a slave node;
2. communicate with it; 3. terminate the connection.  In a daisy-chain
topology, step 1 could be as simple as sending a time-to-live count
byte, or even an unary-encode count, which gets decremented on its
path through the chain; intermediate nodes would change to a
“passthrough” state and forward the data, bit by bit or byte by byte.
Steps 2 and 3 could then be distinguished using, for example, HDLC
bit-stuffing, constant-overhead byte stuffing, or SLIP framing.

Hmm, I guess that isn’t very different from the previous approach,
actually, except that in this approach, I was thinking not to forward
packets that didn’t need to be sent on further.  Instead, the slave
addressed would simply send reply data back to the master.  It would
be more like a traditional serial connection than a packet-switched
network, or SPI, or the ISA bus.

You could also have a special broadcast address for addressing all
slave nodes at once, or within network latency anyway; and barrier
synchronization of the master waiting on all slaves could be achieved
by yet another kind of packet which a slave only passes to its
successor if it is in “waiting” state.

At 1Mbps, which should be easy to reach, and one byte of buffer per
node, the latency of a 256-node daisy chain would be 2048 bits: 2
milliseconds.  This might be too much latency to replace Fabnet.
10Mbps should be electrically easy to reach but might be a larger
computational load.

If the data is differentially encoded on a single twisted pair — as in
RS-422 or RS-485 — a dc bias on this pair can be used to provide power
from one board to another.  This is more suitable for board-level
connections than chip-level connections.  As I’ve argued previously in
file `current-source-grid`, a constant-current supply meshes nicely
with daisy-chaining boards together, and allows the use of thinner
wires.  Consider using 24AWG copper phone-line wire, as I suggested
there, 510μm in diameter, 1.8 g/m, 84mΩ/m, with a constant-current
supply running up to 48V at the 3.5 A maximum for that kind of wire.
This gives you a maximum of 168 W for the overall system, although of
course anything that needs more power than that could use a separate
power supply.

This allows you to do both power and data on just two wires from each
board to the next, but the final board needs a final pair of wires to
be brought back around to the master to complete the circuit.  So each
board needs four terminals in the end.  You could reduce the number of
cables by 1, and potentially isolate and partly tolerate connection
errors, by using a four-wire cable from each node to the next, two of
which are merely the return path and are wired straight through from
the downstream socket to the upstream socket.

Differential bus connections like the CAN bus require only two
connections per board, but can’t also supply power at the same time.
So CAN bus boards end up requiring at least four terminals, too.

### RS-485 ###

RS-485 is the basis for the Fabnet bus used in Peek’s dissertation.
It’s a multidrop version of RS-422, which is a differential version of
RS-232.  Because they use terminating resistors and balanced
transmission lines, RS-422 and RS-485 can reach data rates of tens of
megabaud over short distances.  RS-485 can be used either in a
two-wire “party line” mode or a four-wire “master-slave” mode, but I
think neither version has an arbitration algorithm for when multiple
devices attempt to transmit at the same time.

### USB ###