UHMWPE seems like it might be an interesting material for clothes, and
indeed, there is a startup (“SheerlyGenius”? I forget) making sheer
UHMWPE pantyhose — the idea is that they will be considerably sturdier
than nylon pantyhose, which is somewhat surprising to me.

UHMWPE fiber has 2.4 GPa of tnsile strength, apparently.  You could
imagine a cloth sort of like rip-stop nylon made from it, with
somewhat thicker fibers every millimeter and very thick fibers every
centimeter.  Say, 3× and 10× thicker than the regular fibers.

I don’t have a super great reference handy for the tensile strength of
cellulose, but file heck-balls says MDF’s UTS is 18 MPa, which is
probably low but in the ballpark.  ASTM A36 steel has a yield stress
of 290 MPa, HIPS has 32 MPa UTS, and annealed aluminum’s yield stress
is around 15–20 MPa.

So let’s say cotton’s tensile strength is 40 MPa.  I have some sturdy
cotton serge shorts here whose cloth is about 700 μm thick.  Achieving
similar strength with UHMWPE would require 40/2400 of the average
thickness, or 12 μm; you could have 160 or so 6-micron-thick threads
per millimeter, with an 18-micron thread each millimeter, and then a
60-micron thread each centimeter.  This gives us an average thickness
of roughly (60·60 + 18·10·18 + (10000-(60+18·10))·12)/10000 = 12.396
microns.  Actually the extra 0.396 microns from the thicker and very
thick threads should probably be doubled, making it 12.8 microns.

However, each 60-micron thread would break under a force of some 7
newtons, the weight of 700 grams.  If you really want rip-stop
strength, you likely need another approach.  Something like knitting,
for example, so that the force at the tip of a rip is distributed over
more cloth, but ideally with knots frequently enough to prevent runs
from spreading.  Alternatively, you could scale the 60-micron threads
up to, say, 300 microns — still half the thickness of the cotton, but
now with a breaking force of 170 newtons, which would make the cloth
unlikely to tear by accident.

Let’s suppose that we knit some shorts from 20-micron-thick UHMWPE
threads, then, and that the knitted cloth is about 60 microns in
thickness and about 60 microns per row of knits or purls.  This might
require 1100 mm × 550 mm of cloth, totaling 36 cubic centimeters and
about 25 grams.  The 550 mm of length is a bit over 9000 rows of
knitting.  The tensile strength of a leg of the shorts as a whole
would be something like 2.4 GPa · 20 microns · 550 mm · 0.5, which
works out to 13 kN, a bit over a tonne.  You could still cut the cloth
with scissors, but ripping it might not be feasible.

To make this garment opaque, you’d probably need to mix in a
substantial amount of some very opaque pigment, such as finely divided
titanium dioxide, carbon black, or gold.  If this is within the body
of the fibers, which is advisable for durability, it will weaken them,
requiring a compensating increase in thickness.

Individual Dyneema fibers are supposedly 12–20 μm in diameter, as
currently manufactured.