Suppose you have built an [undersea or other underwater base][0], like
Jacques Cousteau, Tom Swift, or many popular science articles from the
1950s; but it's autonomous rather than having an umbilical to a
surface support station.  How do you get energy to run and repair your
base?

[0]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Underwater_habitat

Nuclear power is clearly the best option, but suppose you can't use
nuclear power for political reasons.

If you have sunlight, you can of course use solar panels, although the
water will absorb some of it.  (See file `underground-arcology` for
notes on the absorption spectra of different kinds of water.)  If
you're under enough water to make it difficult to see you from the
surface, or from space, you will get only a tiny amount of sunlight
energy.

You can periodically receive shipments of fuel, but burning fuel
requires an oxidizer such as oxygen, so you need shipments of oxidizer
too.  As described in file `the-suburbean`, the best option to me
seems to be sodium chlorate, but even so, you end up with only 5 MJ/kg
when you include the weight of the sodium chlorate rather than the
usual 43 MJ/kg we're used to on land.

By floating a buoy on the surface, it's possible to gather surface
solar energy, and also some amount of wave power, as well as sucking
in air for human respiration and perhaps fuel combustion.  But the
buoy is visible, which may be undesirable, and also exposed to damage
from heavy seas, ship collisions, oxygen, and sunlight.

I think the best option in many places is analogous to kite wind
power, using a reconfigurable-geometry buoy floated some distance
below the surface but above the bed; when configured for high-drag
geometry, it pulls on its tether, which is gradually let out,
generating power; when the tether is nearly exhausted or it's too
close to the surface, it's reconfigured for a lower-drag geometry and
reeled back in at a much lower energy cost than what it generated when
it was being let out.  This is much easier than the equivalent task in
the air because the velocities are lower and it's easy to reconfigure
the "kite's" buoyancy for a particular altitude