I was thinking you could use webcam streaming video to provide
servoing feedback on a hanging V-plotter.  I mean, you could use it to
provide servoing feedback for any kind of robot (at least for things
that don’t need <30ms or so latency) but V-plotters (aka polargraphs,
drawbots, wall-plotters, etc.) are particularly promising.

There’s a bunch of V-potter videos on YouTube, including some which
are just video from a fixed point of view, in real time, without any
change in point of view.  These are not the most interesting or
informative videos to watch as a human being, but they make it
possible to test this concept before actually having built a
V-plotter.

<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HU9SaCFnCng> shows a deformable,
swinging V-plotter, more rapidly than real-time, with changes in
lighting in the room, for a couple of minutes.

<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WyLPpGdfR7s> is 5 minutes from a
fixed point of view of a somewhat wobbly V-plotter, from a fixed point
of view, with lots of texture in the background and a few distractors.
Midway through a guy walks in front of the camera, and the lighting
changes.  Toward the end, the lighting changes again.

<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i5rxxGuWUo8> has a minute or so in
the middle of a somewhat wobbly V-plotter drawing on a shiny
whiteboard.

<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ojcZ7kcklu4> is a sped-up video of a
Polargraph drawing Spider-Man, from a single point of view.

<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aiw3hkDvp-M> has about a minute of a
Polargraph drawing some classic art, sped up.

<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qury-0BiURA> has another few minutes
of a Polargraph drawing.  The camera moves a bit toward the end, and
lighting flickers throughout.

<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MbpT907qIHg> has a couple of
1-minute-or-so sequences of time-lapse drawing, each from a different
points of view.  This one uses fishing line for the V, which means the
strings won’t interfere with tracking.

<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MG70TvuRU9Y> has a couple of
30-second-or-so sped-up segments of a V-plotter drawing from fixed
points of view, one with changing lighting.

<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5z8LTj74uiE> is almost a minute of
sped-up footage of a V-plotter with a novel design and substantial
parallax.

<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0BOuqLPaEMc> is a very short video of
a V-plotter made out of a binder clip.

<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iE7sCiv7VTE> is a particularly tricky
case: the V-plotter gondola is made from a CD-R, which means that its
reflection is almost entirely specular, and furthermore has
diffraction rainbows all over it.  The video runs in apparently real
time for about six minutes.

<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FmCWx30g7Ks> is a whiteboard
V-plotter in real time for about two minutes.  It’s rather blurry.

<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jknm5qtgO1A> is another blurry
whiteboard V-plotter in real time (except for occasional jumps), with
conspicuous hanging cables.

<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u4KyPN0sw0A> is a V-plotter using a
spray-paint can that appears to be using the Hektor constant-speed
path-design software.  Its speed varies.

<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OselyTkA6wU> seems to be Hektor
itself, running in real time for some minutes.

On another topic, <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ycrGUTGlzik> shows
the design of the PolargraphSD gondola that keeps its wobble so low.
It uses cartridge bearings to pivot the two strings around the precise
XY center of the gondola.
