Could you design a simple virtual machine for vector math that a wide
range of existing and future vector hardware (SIMD instruction sets,
GPUs, FPGAs) could execute efficiently?  A sort of equivalent for C’s
virtual machine (viewing C as a virtual machine!) but aimed at things
that can execute efficiently across a wide range of today’s computers,
not 1984’s — a lowest common denominator
that’s low enough to get substantial parallelism on
almost anything, but not so low that typical code is as slow as
typical C code.

I think it’s feasible.

Of course, nonportable code will always be faster, but the idea of the
vector VM is to be fast enough to use portable code most of the time.

I was originally thinking of this approach as part of an archival
virtual machine proposal, a successor to Chifir sufficiently improved
to be workable, whose raison d’être was archaeological in nature — the
objective is for an archaeologist finding the artifact to be able to
implement the specified virtual machine as a fun afternoon hack, then
load the ancient data into it and breathe life back into it.  I
thought maybe a pipelined vector design could work, but upon further
consideration, I decided it wasn’t well suited to compatible
reimplementations without reference to an existing working
implementation.

Still, though, I think it might be interesting for less demanding
purposes, the sort of thing OpenCL and Vulkan are aimed at.  It’s sort
of a microscopic SPIR-V with about 30 operations, or a VM for Wadge’s
Lucid.

Unfinished notes
----------------

Old Cray machines weren’t parallel-SIMD, where you could add,
subtract, multiply, take the square root, or whatever of each of 4 or
8 or 16 values in a single cycle; instead they had some 8 “vector
registers” of, say, 64 single-precision floats, and vector operations
on them which operated elementwise.  But the machines didn’t have 64
floating-point execution units; they might have 6.  So a
vector-to-vector operation necessarily took place one float at a time,
but pipelined, with one result per cycle.  Moreover, you could “chain”
operations from one register to the next, and even to main memory.
So, for example, you might compute mx + b, for vector values of the
variables, as follows:

    vectorload m_addr, V1
    vectorload x_addr, V2
    vectorload b_addr, V4
    vectormul V1, V2, V3
    vectoradd V3, V4, V5
    vectorstore V5, y_addr
    
So with six instructions you would start the computation of the
values, and then it might take 64 more clock cycles to finish.  This
is how the Cray-1 got 138 megaflops, bursting to 240 megaflops, in
1977, on an 80MHz clock.

It’s also very similar to how Numpy gets reasonable performance for
numerical code despite being an extension for dog-slow CPython.  This,
plus Python’s “iterable” interface (now adopted by JS and Java),
suggests the approach of computing abstract sequences of values (of
some arbitrary length) rather than individual values or vector values
of some fixed length, and including a stride argument in the vector
memory fetch instruction.

Consider a matrix-matrix multiply C = AB.  Here, in C-style row-major
form (which is backwards from standard mathematical notation) C[i][j]
= Σₖ A[i][k] B[k][j], or Cᵢⱼ = ΣₖAᵢₖBₖⱼ; writing that as nested loops:

    C = {0}; // everywhere (this is not valid C syntax)
    for (int i = 0; i < A_rows; i++) {
        for (int j = 0; j < B_rows; j++) {
            for (int k = 0; k < A_cols; k++) {
                C[i][j] += A[i][k] * B[k][j];
            }
        }
    }

Thus written, the code is precisely equivalent if we swap inner and
outer loops into any of the 6 permutations.  As written, it totals
each item of C separately, iterating over a column of A and a row of B
for each one; but we could also, for example, multiply a cell of A by
a row of B, sending the results to the corresponding row of C, merely
by swapping the inner two loops:

    C = {0};
    for (int i = 0; i < A_rows; i++) {
        for (int k = 0; k < A_cols; k++) {
            for (int j = 0; j < B_rows; j++) {
                C[i][j] += A[i][k] * B[k][j];
            }
        }
    }

That is, Cᵢ = ΣₖAᵢₖBₖ.

We could turn the inner loop here into a program that reads a vector
from memory, multiplies it by a scalar (previously loaded from A),
reads another vector from memory (the row of C), adds the product to
it, and writes it back where it came from.

In the case where C has many more rows than columns, though, it would
be more efficient to write a column at a time.  This is the same kind
of simple transformation:

    C = {0};
    for (int j = 0; j < B_rows; j++) {
        for (int k = 0; k < A_cols; k++) {
            for (int i = 0; i < A_rows; i++) {
                C[i][j] += A[i][k] * B[k][j];
            }
        }
    }

That is, C[...][j] = Σₖ B[k][j]·A[...][k].  Here we are updating a
whole column of C by adding to it the product of a scalar from B and a
column of A.

This is of course not optimally cache-friendly (something the Crays
didn’t have to worry about) but it still might be a win if C has a
sufficiently small number of columns.

Building a dataflow network on the stack
----------------------------------------

So suppose that we have a stack machine equipped with an additional
stack where the items are not numbers but streams of some finite but
possibly large length.  By manipulating these streams, we can set into
motion highly parallelizable computations which may involve orders of
magnitude more computation than that required to interpret the
instruction stream.  The virtual machine does not know about
multidimensional arrays, but it can efficiently execute some
computations on them.

The crucial thing to note here is that the stream operations here
treat different indices in the stream as completely separate; there is
no way for anything that happens at index 0 in the stream to affect
anything that happens at index 1 in the stream, or vice versa.  So the
execution of the entire stream is embarrassingly parallel.  Whether
that’s useful or not depends on what you’re trying to compute.

### Sources ###

There are two operations which create a new sequence: `load(address,
mode, stride, count)` and `iota(start, stride, count)`.  (They can
take their arguments from, for example, a different stack.)  `load`
produces a sequence of `count` items loaded from memory using `mode`
(e.g. uint32_t or `float*8`) located `stride` bytes apart; if `stride`
is 0, then all of them will be copies of the same value.  `iota`
similarly produces a series of `count` items; the first will be the
number `start`, and succeeding items will increase by `stride`, which
may be 0.

The span of addresses that will be accessed by `load` can be
bounds-checked as soon as the `load` instruction executes, allowing
the bounds check to be amortized over a potentially very large number
of data accesses.

### Sinks ###

There are correspondingly a few different final destinations we can
send these streams to.

`store(address, mode, stride, count)` is the counterpart of `load`; it
stores the values of a stream into memory.  With `load` and `store` we
can copy blocks of data around memory, translate it between different
numeric formats, and transpose matrices by using different strides.

`argmax` and `argmin` each take two streams as arguments: an `index`
stream and a `data` stream, which should be of the same length.  When
the streams are exhausted, they yield the `index` value corresponding
to the largest or smallest datum from the `data` stream.  If the
`index` and `data` streams are the same, they thus produce the max or
min of the stream.

`sum`, similarly, computes the sum of a stream.

### Stream transformations ###

However, there are also a large collection of operations that operate
elementwise on streams.  For example, the `~` operation computes the
bitwise NOT of the values in a stream, consuming the stream and
producing a new stream of the altered values.  The `+` operation
consumes two streams (which should be of the same length) and produces
a new stream of the sums of corresponding values from those streams.

The collection of stream transformations consists of the following 16
operations:

- `+`;
- unary `-`, which computes the numeric negation of each item in the
  stream;
- binary `-`, which subtracts streams elementwise;
- `*`, which multiplies streams elementwise;
- `divmod`, which consumes a stream of dividends and a stream of
  divisors, and produces a stream of floored quotients and a stream of
  nonnegative remainders;
- `<<`, which consumes a stream of quantities and a stream of bit
  shift distances, performing an arithmetic left shift on each
  quantity;
- `>>`, which is the equivalent right-shift — a logical right shift
  for unsigned quantities, an arithmetic right shift for signed;
- `|`, which computes the bitwise OR of two streams;
- `&`, which computes the bitwise AND;
- `^`, which computes the bitwise XOR;
- `~`;
- `\`, which computes the bitwise abjunction `(a & ~b)`;
- `<`, which consumes two streams and produces a stream of boolean
  values which is true when the value from the first stream is less
  than the corresponding value from the second;
- `=`, the same except that it tests for equality;
- `?:`, which consumes a stream of booleans and two streams of
  quantities, producing a single output stream; its values are
  quantities from the first stream when the booleans are true, and
  from the second stream when the booleans are false;
- `⌈`, which combines two streams to produce a stream of values that
  come from the first stream when those are greater, or from the
  second stream when those are.

### Stream stack manipulation ###

You also have the usual collection of simple stack operations for the
stream stack — `dup`, `drop`, `swap`, `over`, `rot`, `>R`, `R@`, and
`R>`.

These are particularly important here because of their effect on the
stream execution engine.  While references to a dataflow network are
live on the stack, the engine doesn’t yet know what use will be made
of them; it is only once the last reference has been removed from the
stack that it can actually execute the requested computation.  If they
are `drop`ped, perhaps it need not do any computation at all.

XXX what happens if you request the sum or argmax of a stream while
other references are still live on the stack?  Maybe just eliminate
`dup` and `over`, because the alternative seems to be unbounded
buffering.

### Why a stream stack ###

Why use a stack machine for building the streams instead of, say, a
register-based virtual machine?  Don’t register-based bytecodes run
faster?

The advantage of a stack machine is that the number of uses of each
value is explicit, while in a register machine, it is implicit.  If
you have no `drop` operation or other way to discard a value, you know
that all values are used; if you additionally have no `dup` or `over`
or `R@` operation or other way to duplicate a value, you know that
each value is used exactly once.  The point at which no more
references to a particular tree exist on the stack is precisely the
point when it will not be used in the future.

Perhaps you could design a two-operand register machine with the same
property, if each register has an “empty”/“full” bit like the memory
words of the Tera MTA, such that using a register as a “source”
operand optionally “empties” it, and reading from “empty” registers or
moving to “full” registers is not permitted.

But a stack machine seems like a much simpler route to the same goal.

### Okay actually fuck all this ###

So what you actually want is to construct a dataflow graph from a
sequence of inputs to an equal-size sequence of outputs.  And you want
to do that while ensuring that your dataflow graph is acyclic, not
only in the directed form but in the undirected form as well.
(There’s no good reason for that restriction, but I did talk about
imposing it, at least possibly.)  And then you want to launch it to go
process stuff and then maybe get results.

In that case, wouldn’t it be best to separate the graph construction
and graph execution steps?  And in that case, wouldn’t it be best to
be able to execute the same graph more than once?  In my matrix
multiplication example, for example, you want to run your inner loop
m×n times (e.g. `A_rows` × `A_cols` times).  There’s no benefit to
reconstructing the graph again every time through the inner loop!

Separating them also eliminates the problem of making sure all the
lengths are equal — you supply the length, along with the input and
output data addresses and strides, when you invoke the graph.  And it
eliminates the question of what to do when you invoke the `sum`
instruction but there are still things left on the stack, because the
sum won’t be delivered at graph construction time in any case, but at
graph invocation time.

(And in that case maybe when you instantiate the sum node, you give it
a destination register, so that you can have several of them in the
same graph.)

Getting back to the question of “a sort of equivalent for C” — is a
stack-based virtual machine really the same level of programming as C?
Wouldn’t you want infix syntax for programming at C level?  Why do you
need some kind of bytecode representation of your vector dataflow
graph?  Wouldn’t you be better off with a language extension for C, or
maybe even a C library?  And in that case, wouldn’t you be better off
with explicit node labels of some kind instead of this dopey
stack-machine interface?  I mean, it would be a lot easier to read
your code, probably, even if infix is too hard to provide because C
doesn’t do operator overloading.