It’s 2018-12-25, and xshmu is about 1800 lines of code (70 kilobytes),
and overdue for its first refactoring.  So far it has a terminal
emulator, a calculator application, a Tetris game, an audio
oscilloscope app, some graphics demos, a Chifir virtual machine, and a
couple of sort-of paint programs, with backends for the Linux
framebuffer console and X11:

     4105 admu.c
     4128 admu_shell.c
     1310 admu_tv_typewriter.c
     3936 chifir.c
     1338 chifir_xshmu.c
     2335 decimal.c
      484 decimal.h
     1562 glyphed.c
     2235 oscope.c
     6909 rpncalc.c
      375 rpncalc.h
     7385 tetris.c
     6778 wercaμ.c
    13218 xshmu.c
     1899 xshmucalc.c
     6056 xshmu_fb.c
     4939 xshmu.h
      134 xshmu_hello.c
      525 xshmunch.c
      810 μpaint.c
    $ cloc μpaint.c xshmu.c xshmunch.c chifir.c chifir_xshmu.c wercaμ.c \
        admu_tv_typewriter.c admu.c admu_shell.c xshmu_hello.c tetris.c \
        xshmu_fb.c glyphed.c oscope.c \
        xshmucalc.c rpncalc.c decimal.c decimal.h rpncalc.h xshmu.h
          20 text files.
          20 unique files.                              
           0 files ignored.

    http://cloc.sourceforge.net v 1.60  T=0.06 s (350.7 files/s, 44744.5 lines/s)
    -------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Language                     files          blank        comment           code
    -------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    C                               17            299            308           1786
    C/C++ Header                     3             31             74             54
    -------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    SUM:                            20            330            382           1840
    -------------------------------------------------------------------------------

There’s a lot of half-assed stuff in there, and a lot of duplication,
and two separate fonts, one of which has only 16 characters, designed
with `glyphed` in about as many minutes, copied and pasted into
tetris.c and xshmucalc.c.  Glyphed, which is the only thing that draws
clickable things so far, would really benefit from some kind of IMGUI
framework.

The two backends have a bunch of duplicated code, namely all the
`xshmu_subpic` (buggy clipping!), `xshmu_copy` (a
standard-C-compliance bug fixed in xshmu.c), and `xshmu_canvas` stuff,
which is kind of a layer that belongs underneath.  On top of this, the
`fill` function from Tetris (copied into glyphed) and the `show`
function from Tetris (copied into xshmucalc.c and extended) should
probably be shared in some place, and probably `show` should take a
font argument, and also we need some fonts.

The alpha-blending stuff in wercaμ needs to integrate the SSE
optimizations from vecalpha.c, and probably also needs to be in some
kind of common location so that, e.g., oscope.c can use it.  (Or maybe
oscope.c should render in a different way, for example, running three
box filters over a monochrome 16-bit framebuffer and mapping the
resulting intensities through a palette.)

`xshmu_fd` has to go; `xshmu_fb` either needs to have separate input
file descriptors for /dev/input/mice and the keyboard, or it needs a
subprocess to re-encode those onto a single stream, so it won’t have
just a single file descriptor.  Maybe `yeso_get_fds(void (*f)(void *,
int), void*)`.  Some of the use of `xshmu_fd` can be taken over by an
added timeout parameter to `xshmu_wait`, which would simplify Tetris
significantly.

Key repeat is potentially a big problem for Tetris.  X11 introduces
spurious key-release events into the input stream for key repeat.

(Incidentally, the mouse thing is somewhat documented in
/usr/share/doc/linux-doc/input/input.txt.gz, and apparently it’s
speaking a kernel-emulated PS/2 protocol, which I guess is three bytes
per packet; looks like the second and third bytes are delta-X and
delta-Y as signed bytes, with Y increasing up, except that there’s a
9th sign bit in the 0x20 (y) and 0x10 (x) position in the first byte.
The first byte low nibble is 0x08, except with bit 0x01 set for the
left button, bit 0x02 set for the right button, bit 0x04 set for the
middle button; dev3/psmouse.c has a PS/2 driver.  Unfortunately the
mouse wheel doesn’t register at all!  For the mouse wheel I thought
you need /dev/input/event5 or whatever, the evdev interface described
in input.txt.gz and event-codes.txt.gz and /usr/include/linux/input.h
(dev3/evdev.c has a somewhat more limited decoder for that protocol)
but apparently you can somehow set the protocol to ImPS/2 for the
wheel.  My keyboard is on /dev/input/event3, with scancodes (e.g. 30
for a, 31 for s, 32 for d); key repeat shows up, including on things
like control keys, but is distinguishable from repeated keypresses;
type=1 (`EV_KEY`) code=30 value=1 is a press of ‘a’, value=2 is a
repeat, value=0 is a release; the scan codes are defined in
/usr/include/linux/input-event-codes.h and come originally from USB
HUT apparently.  There are also type=4 (`EV_MSC`) code=4 (`MSC_SCAN`)
value=30, but for some keys the value doesn’t match.  A great benefit
of this interface is that it isn’t modal; an app that opens this
interface doesn’t need to reset the keyboard mode to normal before it
exits.)

Some kind of windowing/terminal system would be super keen.  Also copy
and paste with mouse-selection support are needed to make the terminal
emulator usable.

A notebook-style shell window manager interface could be super
interesting, embedding graphical programs and saving their graphical
output — by default just the last frame, with hotkeys to save
screenshots and start full recording — as well as their textual
input/output.  It could also limit their CPU use, memory use, and
filesystem access, and checkpoint their state for revivification.  For
windowing, you could have a hotkey to undock the graphical program
from its window within the shell.

(Also, I should totally have an animated GIF backend.)

The size of the state to checkpoint should be manageable for many
apps; the oscilloscope app on the framebuffer has a 135KB heap
segment, a 139KB stack segment, its 8-megabyte framebuffer and backing
store, and a couple of read-write segments from shared libraries:

    8192 00400000-00402000 r-xp 00000000 fc:01 467163                             /home/user/dev3/oscope_fb
    4096 00602000-00603000 r--p 00002000 fc:01 467163                             /home/user/dev3/oscope_fb
    4096 00603000-00604000 rw-p 00003000 fc:01 467163                             /home/user/dev3/oscope_fb
    135168 00889000-008aa000 rw-p 00000000 00:00 0                                  [heap]
    8298496 7f018256c000-7f0182d56000 rw-p 00000000 00:00 0 
    8294400 7f0182d56000-7f018353f000 rw-s 00000000 00:06 399                        /dev/fb0
    1835008 7f018353f000-7f01836ff000 r-xp 00000000 fc:01 1179699                    /lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libc-2.23.so
    2097152 7f01836ff000-7f01838ff000 ---p 001c0000 fc:01 1179699                    /lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libc-2.23.so
    16384 7f01838ff000-7f0183903000 r--p 001c0000 fc:01 1179699                    /lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libc-2.23.so
    8192 7f0183903000-7f0183905000 rw-p 001c4000 fc:01 1179699                    /lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libc-2.23.so
    16384 7f0183905000-7f0183909000 rw-p 00000000 00:00 0 
    155648 7f0183909000-7f018392f000 r-xp 00000000 fc:01 1179696                    /lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/ld-2.23.so
    12288 7f0183ade000-7f0183ae1000 rw-p 00000000 00:00 0 
    4096 7f0183b2e000-7f0183b2f000 r--p 00025000 fc:01 1179696                    /lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/ld-2.23.so
    4096 7f0183b2f000-7f0183b30000 rw-p 00026000 fc:01 1179696                    /lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/ld-2.23.so
    4096 7f0183b30000-7f0183b31000 rw-p 00000000 00:00 0 
    139264 7ffd0242b000-7ffd0244d000 rw-p 00000000 00:00 0                          [stack]
    8192 7ffd024ba000-7ffd024bc000 r--p 00000000 00:00 0                          [vvar]
    8192 7ffd024bc000-7ffd024be000 r-xp 00000000 00:00 0                          [vdso]
    4096 ffffffffff600000-ffffffffff601000 r-xp 00000000 00:00 0                  [vsyscall]

That’s generated as follows from /proc/$pid/maps:

    import re
    se = re.compile(r'([0-9a-f]+)-([0-9a-f]+)')
    for line in maps.splitlines():
      mo = se.search(line)
      if not mo: print(line); continue
      length = int(mo.group(2), 16) - int(mo.group(1), 16)
      print length, line

You don’t have to checkpoint the framebuffer contents, since they’ll
be redrawn anyway after restart.  And oscope, as it turns out, is
already prepared to restart its child process if it dies, because its
child process does die, due I think to bugs in the arecord code.  So
in theory, with a different checkpoint-aware yeso backend, you could
checkpoint just its quarter-meg or so of live data.  (As it happens,
most of that data is garbage too, but that’s hard to know.)

ASLR might complicate restarting from checkpoints, but that’s in part
because we’re still programming at the C level; a virtual machine
could simplify this enormously.

In other directions: I really want to try writing some LuaJIT code on
it, and I want to write Hypothesis tests for rpncalc.

It’s somewhat dismaying to have so many applications for xshmu written
in C, since, although I would like to keep it pleasant to program in
C, I mostly want to use it to bootstrap out of the C ecosystem and
into an archival-virtual-machine ecosystem.  At this point I have
13 applications written:

1. RPN decimal calculator (308 lines of C, not counting the 28 lines
   in rpncalc_linux.c for tty output)
2. PNG viewer (71 lines of C, written after the above count)
3. Tetris (244 lines of C, though some of that needs to be factored
   out)
4. glyphEd fatbits bitmap editor (52 lines of C, including some
   copy-pasted from Tetris)
5. admu ADM-3A emulator (339 lines of C, including offline-mode and on
   a pty)
6. Chifir emulator (110 lines of C)
7. Audio oscilloscope (36 lines of C)
8. Wercaμ graphics hack (166 lines of C)
9. Munching squares graphics hack (17 lines of C)
10. Hello, world (7 lines of C)
11. μpaint (21 lines of C)
12. (the nameless graphics demo inside xshmu.c itself)
13. The image-slicing font-making program, also written since the
    above (161 lines of C)

This works out to (+ 308 71 244 52 339 110 36 166 17 7 21 161) = 1532
lines of C for applications which will need to be rewritten in
whatever other language I end up using.  This contrasts with the 41
lines of xshmu.h, the 312 lines of X11 backend, and the 201 lines of
the fbcon backend (somewhat duplicated with the X11 backend).

So I just wrote `imgui-programming-language` about what kind of
programming language I would like.  So far it’s focusing on
very-low-level stuff (reducing code and bugs in the small, not in the
large) and it also describes a language with, to me, an intimidatingly
difficult implementation.  I think I should see if I can simplify the
design to a minimum, maybe something at the C level or even a Lisp,
and then see what I can add to it.

The simplest possible thing would of course be a Forth, but writing
the compiler for it is a pain.  Still, a Forth-level “portable
assembler” that does simple register allocation would simplify later
work by a lot.  (At some point I want to extend that into a
deterministic vector virtual machine for software archival and
deterministic recomputation.)  It wouldn’t need to support macros,
since its intended use is as a backend for higher-level languages.  I
do want to expose the stack implementation sufficiently to enable
static stack-depth bounds for applications where that’s desirable.

I had thought, after reading Finkel’s book section about CLU
iterators, that doing them required allocating the iterator activation
record with enough slack space on the stack for whatever functions the
yielded-to block might call — that is, that those functions would put
their activation records in between the function invoking the iterator
and the iterator itself.  But that isn’t true; the block can push the
arguments for those functions on top of the iterator state.

Vaguely related: <https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=18765868> is a
Sixel image listing program for `xterm -ti vt340`.
